Vouet's unprecedented interpretation of The Four Seasons.
As the most influential artist of his generation, Vouet had an active and brilliant career. When he returned to Paris, following 15 years in Italy, he brought with him a fully developed baroque style. Moreover, he had acquired the organisational ability to co-ordinate the subsequent flow of commissions for altarpieces and large-scale decorative cycles. He was able to maintain the pace of activity due to the large studio he established, where many great painters of the next generation were trained. Vouet's interpretation of the four seasons is unprecedented. Flora (spring, synonymous with Venus) can be indentified by the wreath of flowers and the crown she is holding. She exchanges an amorous look with Adonis (winter), clad as a hunter. They are watched by Ceres (summer), who carries a sickle and ears of corn. Below, the infant Bacchus (autumn), carrying grapes, is frightened by the dog. A circular movement of curves and arcs echoes the shape of the canvas. The flat blue background throws the figures into relief, and the pale, cool colours (the expanse of creamy flesh, the pink and the cool green) emphasise the gay, decorative quality of the tondo.

A rare group portrait by Giovanni Battista Moroni.
This is a very intimate portrait showing a father protectively embracing his two children. The name of the sitter is unknown, but traditionally it was presumed to be a widower with his children. Apart from the evident paternal tenderness, however, nothing really sustains that suggestion today. Even the sober black dress of the man is not definitive proof of his mourning since it was commonly worn at the time.
Although Moroni's production includes several religious altarpieces, he is best known for his portraits and is considered among the very greatest Renaissance painters of the genre. He operated throughout his life in northern Italy, and painted noblemen, prelates, scholars and ladies of every age. They were all depicted with great likeness, without any idealisation and, most of the time, with meditative aspect. Since he generally portrayed single figures, the present picture is considered quite rare.

Influences & Innovation on Palmezzano.
Palmezzano was a pupil of Melozzo da ForlA­, and for a long period he collaborated with and imitated his teacher. He was active in the north-east of Italy, and his prolific work very much reflects the established artistic tendencies of that region. A typical example is our altarpiece, which, although dated 1513, has a symmetrical structure and other elements commonly used on the Adriatic coast at the end of the 15th century. The scene presents the Virgin on a high throne holding the standing Christ Child, with an elegant canopy above their heads. Behind them, an arch opens onto a detailed wooded landscape with distant mountains and a church on the hill. The architecture is heavily decorated with classical bas-reliefs and grottesche motifs. At the foot of the throne a small angel is playing a lute, and beside him are the two patron saints, St John the Baptist and St Lucy. Although painted in a traditional manner and without any significant innovation, this Holy Conversation is appealing for its vivid colours and light effects.

The identity of the sitter in Giovanni Francesco Penni's 'Portrait of a Young Man'.
For a long period this picture was regarded as a self-portrait. This was found to be incorrect, however, after the discovery of a drawing by Giulio Romano revealing the real features of Penni. While the identity of the sitter has returned to anonymity, the quality of the portrait remains undiminished. The favourite pupil of Raphael, Penni assisted him in all the major works executed in the Vatican. Penni's portraits are not numerous, but they are always remarkable.
This portrait shows a young gentleman, probably in his late 20s, elegantly dressed in black. Baldassare Castliglione, in The Book of the Courtier (1528), offers an account of the fashionable colours used by his contemporaries: 'Black apparel is more becoming than any other colour, but if the clothes are not black they should be at least of a dark colour'. In the picture the physiognomy of the sitter appears carefully studied. A light beard outlines the oval face, and the mouth is precisely drawn with a pronounced upper lip, while the eyes look directly at the observer.

A human portrayal of Christ's suffering.
The episode of the Ecce Homo is one of the most moving moments of Christ's Passion. Having been repeatedly flagellated and ridiculed with a crown of thorns, Jesus was presented by Pilate for the verdict of the Jewish people. The image of Christ offered by Titian in this picture is particularly moving. The Saviour appears powerless, in tears, and his tortured body is covered in blood. It is an image of real physical suffering, but it is also one of great spirituality. The painting was carried out rapidly with fast dabs of paint. The speed of execution is evident in the number of visible readjustments, such as the repositioning of the sceptre.
In the earlier part of his career Titian had collaborated with Giorgione in Venice. Soon, however, he was fully independent and was recognised as the most talented artist in that city. His fame led him to become the favourite painter of the leading Italian families, as well as of Pope Paul III and of the Emperors Charles V and Philip II.

Discussion of the miracle in Romano's 'The Virgin Invoking God'.
According to the hagiographic Golden legend, Pope Leo I, at the end of celebrating a mass, felt momentarily aroused by a woman who had kissed his hand. Ashamed of his sin, he punished himself by cutting of the hand that had been kissed, but the Virgin mercifully restored it. Apparently, this extraordinary healing took place in the Basilica of Santa Maria Maggiore in Rome, on the precise spot where the Pope used to venerate an icon of the Virgin Advocate.
Antoniazzo treats the episode with great skill and elegance. The Virgin is the protagonist, and is depicted in the act of imploring God to concede the miracle. Although modelled on traditional iconography, she is not a rigid and hieratic figure but has been transformed into a calm and gracious Renaissance Madonna. At the bottom, under a parapet, the miraculous event is represented in reduced scale; here an angel can be seen reinstating the hand to the Pope.
During the second half of the 15th century Antoniazzo became the most competent Roman painter. His ability to absorb influences from different artists who came to Rome helped him to develop an original style which, over a number of years, allowed him to compete successfully for numerous important commissions.

Keating's response to the Irish Civil War. 
An Allegory was painted towards the end of 1922, at a time when civil war was raging in Ireland. It depicts disparate groups of people connected with this event but who, to all intents and purposes, seem to be unaware of each other's presence. The setting is in a parkland before a large gutted house. In the foreground, which is dominated by the gnarled trunk of a tree, members of the regular and irregular armies dig a grave. A coffin draped in the tricolour flag of Ireland lies on the ground beside them. Close by, a clergyman converses with a man in business attire. Two more figures are seated at the base of the great oak tree, a mother holding a child to her breast and a man reclining on the ground, full of brooding intensity.
The painting obliquely conveys two messages: the loss of ideals for Ireland as a consequence of the Civil War, and the artist's personal response to this. After the valiant fight to gain independence, nationalistic ideals were ruthlessly sacrificed for radically different visions of freedom. The reference to the dead, and the ruined house behind, are reminders of the destructive force conflict. The two figures who dig the grave, symbolically turned away from each other, indicate the internecine horror of civil war. The other figures in the painting are representative of the tragedy that engulfed all sections of Irish society. The glowering, sprawling figure in the foreground is a self-portrait of the artist, registering his bitter disillusionment at this turn of events.
Sean Keating is best known for his treatment of contemporary Irish themes, and also for his portrayal of rugged Irish types.

Lavery's grand family portrait.
Born in Belfast and trained in Glasgow, London and Paris, John Lavery settled in London , where he established himslef as a celebrated portraitist. His sitters included leading figures of international society as well as British royalty. This impressively large portrait depicts the artist's wife Hazel, her daughter Alice from her first marriage and his daughter Eileen by his first wife. The painting was begun in his London studio in 1909. Hazel Lavery is fashionably dressed in a feathered turban and richly coloured silk and satin Paisley coat. Alice is seated in a basket chair while Eileen leans gracefully across the grand piano. The family dog, Rodney Stone, lies at the feet of the two girls. In the background Ayisha, the maid, is seen entering the room bearing a salver of fruits. Also visible in the portrait is the artist himself. Reflected in a mirror, his palette and brush clearly visible, Lavery paints himself studying the group of figures he is portraying.
The painting is striking for its sense of immence space, the modelling of the figures in light and shade, the fluid handling of paint and its eye-catching colourful passages.
The composition is based on Las Meninas by Velasquez, a painter much admired by Lavery. The grouping of the figures in the fore-ground, the reflection of the artist in the distant mirror, the position of the dog and, above all, the scale of the interior, recall Velasquez's famous painting of 1656.

The influence of 17th-century Dutch painting in the work of Courbet.
Artistically and politically, Courbet was one of the most important and most controversial figures of the realist movement. Throughout his career he painted portraits of fellow artists and writers, particularly those who shared his political and social views. When he held a private exhibition of 115 works in Paris in 1867, he included his portrait of Marlet, at which time he dated it to 1851. Both Adolphe Marlet and his brother Tony were boyhood friends of the artist. Adolphe was a barrister and councillor for the department of Mayenne and appears to have worked for a while with the artist Hesse. Courbet also included him in two earlier compositions, After Dinner at Ornans and his famous Burial at Ornans.
In this portrait he reveals the influence of 17th-century Dutch painting. Like the Dutch masters, realist critics required that a portrait should reveal character. Here, using a strong, vigorous brush technique, Marlet's face is built up of short strokes of grey green, brown, pink, light yellow and white over yellow and ochre. This multi-layered approach enabled the artist to capture the nuances of light playing on his friend's familiar features.

Yverni's Annunciation altarpiece.
The panel is attributed to Yverni by comparison with the artist's only known signed work, a triptych in Turin. Against a gold background the Virgin of the Annunciation kneels at an altar. As she receives the message from the archangel Gabriel she raises her right hand to her throat, while her left hand signals the words Magnificat anima mea Dominium (My soul doth magnify the Lord) in her open book. A vase containing a tall lily stem, symbol of her purity, stands between them. St Stephen presents two donors; the saint is dressed as a deacon with the palm of martyrdom in his left hand, and bears the instrument of his martyrdom, a stone, on his head. Above the archangel, God the Father appears in a celestial sphere, and emanating from the heavenly rays are the dove of the Holy Spirit and a tiny figure of the Christ Child.
The picture was transferred at an early stage from its original poplar wood support to canvas, and as a result has suffered some damage, evident principally in the draperies. Before its acquisition it was transferred to a new panel.

Burton's delicate and romantic watercolour.
This is one of the most famous images in the collection of the National Gallery of Ireland. The subject is taken from a medieval Danish ballad which was translated into English and published in 1855. It tells the story of Hellelil, who falls in love with one of her personal guards, Hildebrand, Prince of Engelland. Her father is angered by this and sends his seven sons to kill the young prince. Rather than directly showing an episode from the story, Burton has chosen to depict the final meeting of the two lovers. The image has been given added poignancy and strenght by the obscured faces of the figures, who look away from each other, and the tender touch between them. The rose petals on the step next to Hellelil symbolise the transience of beauty.
Burton's interest in medieval imagery was not unusual in the mid-19th century. The Pre-Raphaelites, with whom he was friendly, were taking a similar interest, and Gothic architecture was being studied seriously for the first time. However, Burton's attention to detail is almost scientific in its precision. He was a close friend of the Irish antiquary and artist, George Petrie, and often travelled with him, becoming knowledgeable in these matters.
Although Burton never worked in oils, the intensity and precise layering of colour in this watercolor give an effect similar to an oil painting.

O'Connor's painting of nature's wrath.
Inspired by the sheer power of nature, the artist depicts the drama of a violent thunderstorm. The work provides an excellent example of a Romantic landscape painting. In this type of image the artist's personal response to the wonders of the natural world becomes part of the subject.
The mood of the scene is set immediately by the giant twisting tree in the left foreground. It strains to remain rooted to the ground against the ferocity of the wind whipping at the branches and leaves. Close by a man struggles to keep on his hat as he surveys the bridge and the rushing torrent of water below. The horses are frightened and, in the way of animals, sense the danger in traversing the rather fragile-looking crossing. The heightened sense of movement in the trees and water, the contrasting areas of light and shadow, and the agitated brushwork, all contribute to this striking representation of a storm. It is thought that O'Connor's treatment of the subject may have been inspired by William Wordsworth's poem, 'The Wagoner' (1819).
O'Connor seems to have been largely self-taught. He went to London in 1813 but after some months was obliged to return home to support his orphaned sisters. He remained in Ireland for about 10 years, working as a landscape artist. In 1822 he returned to London.

Pissarro's still life paintings.
Pissarro had been in London during the Franco-Prussian War, but by November 1871 he had returned to Louveciennes with his family. In the absence of family, however, the Prussians had used their rented house as a stable and billet. The place was unrecognisable, but worse still, more than 1,200 of Pissarro's paintings and drawings, representing 20 years' work, had disappeared or been destroyed.
Not surprisingly Pissarro and his family left Louveciennes early in 1872, moving to Pontoise. Here he remained for 10 years, painting the rural and suburban environments. He also painted a number of still-life and flower pieces in the period 1872-73, several featuring the same pretty wallpaper with a sprig repeated in vertical bands. 'Chrysanthemums in a Chinese Vase' is the most "finished" of these. The rich dark blue vase with its ornate Chinese pattern is reflected on the highly polished table. The flowers are tightly and carefully painted in muted shades that are repeated in the wallpaper. The effect is sophisticated but warm. Pissarro's wife, Julie, was extremely fond of flowers, and often gathered bouquets for her husband to paint on rainy days.

Gerard Dillon's fascination with Connemara.
From the Second World War onwards Gerard Dillon made regular visits to Connemara in the west of Ireland. Like many Irish artists before him, he was inspired by the stark but beautiful landscape of mountains, sea and lakes. He was also captivated by the simple and innocent lifestyle he found there. The pace of country life was slow, in marked contrast to that of urban towns and cities elsewhere in Ireland. This scene contains elements typically associated with the western seaboard: the distinctive dry-stone walls marking out each plot of land, the thatched cottages, the activities of the people, their farm animals. The present is united to the past by the inclusion of a small graveyard, the figure of the sculpted monk, the abbey ruins, the dolmen and the high cross. Dillon employs simple outlines, flattened forms and sharp colour contrasts that recall the art of the Celtic Christian period. In this way the notion of a timeless place is further reinforced.
Dillon's unsophisticated, naA ve style is particularly suited to the subject matter. It also reflects the fact that he did not begin to paint seriously until he was aged 30. He was an active member of many art groups and represented Ireland at several international exhibitions.

Paolo Uccello as an experimental artist.
Paolo Uccello entered the workshop of Lorenzo Ghiberti at a young age. Little is known of his early activity. Between 1425 and 1430 he is recorded in Venice working as a mosaicist. After his return to Florence he was greatly impressed by the new artistic climate of the city. He started studying the possibilities offered by the new spatial concepts of the Renaissance, and experimented in his compositions with bold, geometrical perspectives.
This Virgin and Child clearly shows the painter's intellectual interest during that period. At the centre of the imaginary space is a motionless Madonna. She emerges from a perfectly calibrated shell-shaped niche, holding back a chubby three-dimensional child who seems ready to jump towards the observer.

The story of Saints Cosmas and Damian.
Cosmas and Damian were two physician brothers living in Asia Minor in the third century. They and their three younger brothers were Christian, and during Diocletian persecutions they were compelled to prove their loyalty to the traditional gods with a sacrifice. When they refused, Lycias, the Roman Consul, submitted them to a series of brutal tortures. Miraculously they survived the torments but, finally, the enraged Consul has them all beheaded.
The episode represented here is the fruitless attempt to burn the five brothers. A circle of flames surrounds them, but the fire turns against the torturers, under the incredulous eyes of Lycias and his dignitaries.
This small panel was part of the predella (lower register) of Fra Angelico's most important altarpiece. Other parts of it are scattered in various galleries worldwide. The altarpiece was painted for the church of San Marco in Florence, and was commissioned by Cosimo de' Medici - whose name is echoed in the profession of Sts Cosmas and Damian (medici means 'physicians' in Italian).
Fra Angelico is one of the great Florentine Renaissance masters. In 1407 he entered the Dominican monastery of Fiesole, assuming the name of Fra Giovanni. Within a few years he had become the most acclaimed monastic painter in Italy.

Claude Lorrain's Interpretation of Ovid's Metamorphoses.
Claude's landscapes are never records of actual places; rather they are idealised memories of the golden age of antiquity, like this episode from Ovid's Metamorphoses, which he imbues with a romantic and nostalgic spirit of the antique world.
Ovid relates how Io, the daughter of Inachus, the first King of Argos, was seduced by Jupiter. She was then transformed by him into a white heifer, to conceal her from his wife Juno. Juno was not deceived, however, and cunningly asked her husband for the heifer as a gift. Claude shows the moment when Juno confides the heifer to the custody of Argus, the hundred-eyed giant (here, however, depicted as a shepherd).
Juno confiding Io to the care of Argus was painted as one of a pair of pictures, which remained together until 1805. The pendant painting, an evening scene entitled Mercury piping to Argus (now in a private collection), portrays the subsequent episode in the story when Mercury charmed Argus to sleep with his lyre and then cut off his head. Both works are recorded in the form of finished drawings in the Liber Veritatis, which Claude kept from 1635.

Pencz's mysterious portrait.
Although the identity of this man is unknown, the inscription in the upper right corner informs us that he was aged 28 when this portrait was painted. It is also fairly certain that he was a citizen of Nuremberg, since Pencz was living and working in that city when the portrait was painted in 1549. The artist, an out-spoken critic of the authorities, had been expelled from Nuremberg in 1525 but was able to return 10 months later. In 1532 he was named the city's official painter.
Pencz appears to have travelled twice to Italy, and the small bronze statuette that the sitter holds in his left hand derives in type from those by the Paduan sculptor and goldsmith, Andrea Riccio. It is of a satyr on the point of embracing a nude woman, and has been identified as Pan seducing Diana.
Although is has been suggested that this is a portrait of a sculptor, the inclusion of the bronze with its unusual and erudite subject matter, the young man's elegant costume, and the interior setting all point to his being a nobleman, portrayed in the contemporary Italian mannerist style.
Vasari's account of Zanobi di Jacopo Machiavelli.
According to Giorgio Vasari - the well-known biographer of Italian Renaissance artists - Zanobi Machiavelli was a pupil of Benozzo Gozzoli. This opinion is certainly confirmed by his works, but his style seems also to have been influenced by Pesellino, and later orientated towards Filippo Lippi. The paintings produced by Machiavelli's workshop were numerous and the typologies were sometimes repeated, although with variants. Generally, his compositions have an elegant appearance but are rather crowded with figures.
Four saints accompany the Virgin and Child. St Bernardino of Siena is on the left, holding a roundel with Christ's monogram encircled by golden rays, along with St Mark with his gospel. To the right is St Louis of Toulouse in his bishop's garb, and St Jerome with the cardinal's hat and his translation of the Bible. All the saints have bare feet because the vividly coloured marble floor on which they stand is holy ground.
The presence in this altarpiece of St Bernardino of Siena and St Louis of Toulouse, two Franciscan saints, may suggest that the picture was painted for a church of this religious order.

A cubist still life.
Picasso was a leading figure of the avant-garde in Spain and Paris and became the most influential figure in modern art in the first half of the 20th century. He was still in Barcelona when he underwent his melancholic 'Blue Period' (1901-1904). He settled in Paris in 1904, taking a studio in the Montmartre tenement known as 'le Bateau-Lavoir'. In 1907 he painted the revolutionary Les Demoiselles d'Avignon, under the influence of African primitivism. With Georges Braque, Picasso created Analytical Cubism (1907-1914), which challenged the optical realism of Impressionism, aiming to express the permanent structure of an object by depicting it as a series of planes, showing it as it would be seen from a number of viewpoints.
In 1924 Picasso spent the summer in Juan-les-Pins where he continued to work on large-scale, Cubist still lifes of a type started the year before. The exuberant light and colours of the Mediterranean inspired him to create more vibrant compositions, such as the canvas shown here.
Still Life with a Mandolin is a night scene in which a fruit dish, bottle and mandolin are displayed on a table covered by a white-striped red cloth. All the objects are painted in a rhythmic and balanced order with lush plain colours and different pattern motifs, showing a decorative taste acquired by Picasso from Henri Matisse.

The quiet drama of Vermeer's 'Woman writing a letter, with her maid'.
Considered one of the principal Dutch painters, Johannes Vermeer specialised in genre scenes, particular those depicting women in domestic settings. Vermeer's work displays an unprecedented level of artistic mastery in its illusion of reality. His figures are often quiet and inactive, which contributes to the solemn and mysterious atmosphere of his paintings. Vermeer's oeuvre is unusually small. Probably as few as thirty-four pictures have survived.
A Lady Writing a Letter is one of Vermeer's most outstanding compositions, and his most ambitious depiction of the theme of letter writing. While a maidservant is staring out of the window, her mistress is writing an epistle. In the foreground on the floor lie a red seal, a stick of sealing wax and an object which is either a letter with a crumpled wrapper or a letter-writing manual, a standard aid for personal correspondence at the time. In either case, the objects seem to have been thrown down by the lady in some agitation.
During his lifetime, Vermeer did not sell A Lady Writing a Letter. After his death, his widow gave it and another painting to a local baker to cover her costs for bread.

The 'Lamentation' as a meditation and reflection on death.
This moving late work by Poussin depicts the moment after Christ's body has been embalmed and just prior to the placing in the tomb, when Christ's mother and a few of his disciples reflect on and grieve his death. Joseph of Arimethea kneels in the entrance of the tomb; St John raises Christ's head on to his lap; Mary Magdalene kisses his hand, while behind her is the 'other Mary' (both are mentioned in the gospels of Mathew and Mark). The jar and basin refer to the anointing with 'myrrh and aloes to preserve the body' (John 19:39).
The expression of grief is largely concentrated in the upright figure of the Virgin, who wipes a tear away with her cloak. Standing apart, she indicates her acceptance of the sacrifice of her son, for the salvation of man, with the gesture of surrender she makes with her left hand. Her role preludes the message of the steadfast strength of faith in the imminent Resurrection, alluded to by the stark tree bearing new shoots. The drama is further increased by the use of intense and vibrant colours. The aging Poussin has conceived the Lamentation as a meditation and reflection on death.

The influence of Caravaggio on Gentileschi's work.
Gentileschi's real surname was Lomi. His father was a goldsmith, and his elder brother Aurelio was a painter of fair ability. He went to Rome at the age of 17, and his early works were in the late mannerist style. From the beginning of the new century, after his encounter with Caravaggio, he turned to naturalism. David and Goliath is a rare example of this early change. The composition is strongly three-dimensional and in part still reflects Gentileschi's mannerist education, but the action is expressed in a new, dramatic and realistic way. The figures are sharply lit from above, creating distinct contrasts of chiaroscuro, even if the artist preferred to use softly blended colours.
The biblical subject of this picture became particularly popular after the Tridentine Council, as a symbol of the triumph of true Faith over Heresy, and was widely used by Caravaggio's followers.
In the 1620s Gentileschi moved first to France and later to England, where he became court painter to King Charles I.

Roderic O'Conor's images of Breton people.
This intimate, colourful portrait is one of a series of peasants in traditional costume. It depicts a three-quarter-lenght figure of a young Breton girl in profile, facing right. The left half of the picture is in shadow and is painted in tones of green and brown; the right half is illuminated with brush strokes of pink and mauve, moving to blues and yellows at the top. The girl wears a cap with a chin strap, painted in green and violet strokes with white, and her hair is purple and navy blue in contrats to the flesh tones of golden and radiant red reflected from the red shawl about her shoulders. Around her hips is a deep blue-green shawl. The unusual viewpoint adds to the intimacy of the portrait - it is as if she is unaware of the crutinity of the artist.
Little is known about O'Conor's early tutelage in painting but he is recorded as having visited Antwerp in 1881. In 1883 he was working under the direction of Carulus Duran in Paris and later became one of the significant members of the Pont-Aven group, which included Paul Gauguin. O'Conor remained in France until his death in 1940.

Francisco de ZurbarA¡n: A New World painter.
Like many other artists born in Estremadura, ZurbarA¡n went to Andalusia for his education. At the age of 15 he entered the Seville workshop of Pedro Diaz de Villanueva, a painter of whom we know very little. It was probably soon after this that he became acquainted with Pacheco, and above all VelA¡zquez, who became a lifelong friend. Once confident of his professional ability ZurbarA¡n moved to Llerena, where he lived and worked for a long period. In 1629 he returned to Seville where he produced some of his best paintings, many of which were destined for the New World.
In his last years, Murillo's growing success in Seville induced ZurbarA¡n to seek the favour of collectors in Madrid, and while there he probably painted this Immaculate Conception. Today we are aware of 13 versions of this popular theme by ZurbarA¡n, of which this is one of the most intimate and attractive. The Virgin is standing on a full moon, and small cherubs emerge from her garments. Beneath, in a landscape, are displayed the attributes of the Lorettan litany, such as the palm, the temple and the cypress. The two allegorical figures are Faith and Hope. With the Virgin representing Christian Charity, together they symbolise the three theological virtues.

An amusing portrayal of Flemish peasants.
This peasant feast is fully signed and dated by the artist. It was clearly a very popular image, as it was replicated many times. Its attraction lies in its animated and amusing portrayal of Flemish peasants who are enjoying a country wedding. The bride looks down demurely at her dowry plate, as the old woman to her right grabs the money pouch from one of the guests. The figures are deliberately caricatured and comical, as they dance and make love at the wedding reception.
It has been argued that subjects like this were intended not just as comical genre scenes but as satirical images conveying a moral message. The crude carvings on the tabletop include a windmill, a heart pierced with arrows, a wine flask, an owl and two intertwined fish. They may be symbolic, but many seem to be simply rough score marks.

Drunkards, gamblers and nursing mothers: Cornelis Bega's most popular subjects.
Grandson of the renowned Mannerist Cornelis Cornelisz. Van Haarlem, Bega probably trained with Adriaen van Ostade, the most significant Dutch painter of peasant scenes. A highly versatile artist, Bega was proficient in painting, drawing, etching and making counterproofs. Although it cannot be proven, he may even have been the first artist in the northern Netherlands to have made monotypes (a print technique in which a drawing or painting is pressed on a sheet of paper, allowing the artist to make only one impression). Bega specialised in scenes of daily life of the middle and lower classes in domestic interiors and taverns. His most popular subjects were drunkards, gamblers and nursing mothers.
This painting shows two men singing from a score. They are surrounded by a clutter of leather-bound books, pieces of cloth and furniture. In the foreground a 'basse de violon' is leaning against a box. This variety of objects allowed Bega to show off his skill in depicting various textures with meticulous brushwork. The palette of brownish and purplish colours is typical of Bega's style.

Artistic License taken by Bernardo Bellotto.
Bellotto was a nephew of Antonio Canaletto, who taught him to become a skilful painted of city views. From 1747 he worked in Dresden at the court of Frederick Augustus II, Prince Elector and King of Poland. At Frederick's request, the artists painted numerous views of the city to celebrate the architectural renovations promoted by the King, and by his father Frederick Augustus I before him.
In this scene the artist has taken some liberties, such as presenting certain buildings in a completed state when in actual fact their construction was still in progress. Otherwise the panoramic view of the centre of the city is precisely rendered, with the buildings beautifully mirrored in the river. In the foreground Bellotto has included some of his court acquaintances. The two gentlemen in the middle are painters and colleagues: Christian Wilhelm Ernst Dietrich and Johann Alexander Thiele. In the nearby group are, on the left Filippo di Violante, personal physician of the King and, at the centre, the corpulent castrato singer NiccolA2 Pozzi, known as 'Niccolini'. Conversing with them are a Turkish servant and, dressed in Tyrolean costume, the court buffoon Froehlich.

A flamboyant portrayal of The Earl of Bellamont.
The Earl of Bellamont was a vain, pompous womaniser, who deserted his wife (a daughter of the Duke and Duchess of Leinster), and in his will acknowledged six illegitimate children by four different mothers. He was installed as a Knight of the Bath in 1764 after quelling a minor uprising, and was created an Earl three years later. He married in 1774, and that same year Reynolds completed this flamboyant portrayal of him.
The Earl rests nonchalantly on his sword, dressed in ceremonial satin and lace and showing off his shoes with rosettes. No other Knight was ever immortalised in such a relaxed pose, or actually wearing the Order's oversize hat with ostrich feathers.
Whereas the face is strongly painted with vermillion red, the fugitive carmine used for the robes has now turned to pink. The cross-legged pose from the antique is a typical 18th-century formula and, allied to the loose costume, far off gaze, undressed hair and falling curtain, evokes the era of Anthony van Dyck. A family reminder is the coot on his banner and one standing below it.

Chardin Elevated the status of the still-life genre.
This appears to be the last of a series of paintings of dead game by Chardin - around 1730 he began to diversify, painting scenes of kitchen interiors, genre scenes and figure compositions - and has one of the most rigidly organised compositions. The rabbits, partridge, game bag and powder flask are arranged in a pyramid resting on a stone ledge. The overall effect is softened by the branch of honeysuckle creeping in from the upper left-hand side, introducing a lighter note in the severe composition. The blue of the petals is picked up by the blue ribbon that binds the animals' legs, while the spot of blood on the neck of one of the animals adds a note of realism.
The painting strikes a solemn note: the mood is quiet and almost reverential. Through a controlled use of muted browns and grey, and by combining a formal composition with accurate, quick brush strokes, Chardin has succeeded in imbuing a simple still life - then regarded as the lowest of genres - with a sense of dignity.

De Ribera: The most sought after painter in Naples.
Nothing is known of the early part of Ribera's life. The first records date to the 1610s, when he had already emigrated to Italy. Between 1616 and 1617 he married, and became firmly established in Naples, the second city of the Spanish kingdom. There, his immediate success in the viceregal court, both with the local aristocracy and with the church hierarchy, transformed him into the most sought after artist in the city, and his huge production just about satisfied the continuous requests for work. In the Counter-Reformation climate of Naples, specific religious themes were encouraged, and subjects of penitent, emaciated, suffering saints, like this depiction of St Onuphrius, were regularly painted in Ribera's workshop.
The pious hermit lived in fourth-century Egypt and spent 40 years in the desert, in prayer and complete isolation. He is traditionally represented as a meagre old man, covered only by a girdle of leaves and fully absorbed in his prayers, with a crown and sceptre depicted in front of him to signify his scorn for human vanities. Ribera's early, harsh realism is still evident in our picture; later this would be substituted by a softer rendering.

Collaboration between Jan Brueghel the Younger and Peter Paul Rubens.
This picture has long been recognised as a collaborative effort between Jan Brueghel II, who painted the landscape and still life, and Rubens, to whom the figures are attributed. Rubens had painted the figures in several works for Jan Brueghel I, and it is understandable that he would have done the same for Brueghel's son when he took over the family workshop after his father's death in 1625.
'Christ in the House of Martha and Mary' was traditionally an interior scene. The move here to an outdoor terrace changes the emphasis - the landscaped grounds of an aristocratic villa lend a peaceful note to the foreground activity. In the distance on the right is the ChA¢teau de Mariemont, the summer residence of the Spanish regents Albert and Isabella Both Rubens and Brueghel I were court painters to the regents, and it is possible that the picture was intended for an aristocratic patron.

Memento Mori in 'Game-piece: the Garden of a ChA¢teau'.
A domestic cock and a brace of pigeons flank a brown hair with its leg pinioned on a branch above tulips and daisies. After experiencing the initial impact of these objects the eye is drawn to the accompanying fruit. The shrivelled marrow, the part eaten pomegranate and plum, the peach with a fly crawling over it and the deteriorating grapes together give this painting a 'memento mori' aspect. Game-pieces such as this, set before a park with statuary and a distant chateau at sunset, were a frequent device used by the artist and offered an idealised image to his patrons. Although hunting was restricted to the nobility and certain officers of state, such pictures were often acquired by the bourgeoisie for their houses. In the 18th century this picture was paired with 'A Goose Attacked by a Spaniel', now missing.
The artist was the son and pupil of Jan Baptist Weenix. Besides Italianate subjects his oeuvre comprises images of the hunt, portraits and genre paintings. 

Nathaniel Hone versus Joshua Reynolds.
Nathaniel Hone established a successful career as a fashionable portrait and subject painter in London. This beautifully executed satirical painting (the full title of which is 'The Pictorial Conjuror, Displaying the Whole Art of Optical Deception') caused and outcry when it was submitted by the artist for exhibition at the Royal Academy, London, in 1775. The reason given was that included in the picture was a nude caricature of the Swiss painter Angelica Kauffman. This was subsequently painted over, but the original figure can still be seen in a sketch in Tate Britain. The true cause of offence, however, was that the picture was seen as an attack on Kauffman's friend Joshua Reynolds, President of the Royal Academy. His practice of borrowing poses from Old Master paintings to ennoble his portraits was seen by Hone as plagiarism.
The model used for the figure of the conjuror was often employed by Reynolds. With his long cane the conjuror summons up an abundance of Old Master prints, while in his hand is a print of Raphael's 'Diadem Madonna'. The subject, 'Truth is revealed to Man', is a pointed reference to Reynold's artistic practice. After a brief showing at the Academy, it was requested that the painting be removed. Hone was furious, and promptly withdrew from the Royal Academy. Without delay he organised an indipendent display of his work, the first one-man show ever held in the British Isles.

A poetic interpretation by Batoni.
Batoni was without doubt the most famous painter in Rome in the second half of the 18th century. His ability as a portraitist attracted innumerable clients to his studio, most of them foreigners who wanted to have their images immortalised during their stay in the Eternal City. Many qualities distinguished his portraits, but perhaps what most fascinated his contemporaries was his facility in obtaining his sitter's likeness with informal, elegant poses, using a range of moderately bright colours and polished contour lines.
We have reason to believe that the young woman portrayed here is the Marchesa Caterina Gabrielli. She was among the best-known social hostesses of the Roman aristocracy, and was widely considered one of the beauties of her time. Here the painter offers a lyrical image of the lady; she is dressed as the huntress goddess Diana, with two greyhounds resting beside her. This po etic interpretation was probably influenced by the intellectual activities of the local Arcadian circles.


Sisley's Saint-MammA©s Series.
Saint-MammA s lies at the confluence of the Seine and Loing rivers, and the canal runs parallel to the Loing.
Writing to Monet in 1881, Sisley described the region: "It's not a bad part of the world, rather a chocolate box landscape. When I arrived there were many fine things to do, but they have worked on the canal, cut the trees, made quays, aligned the banks." The artist painted a series of landscapes at Saint-MammA s dating from 1883, all of which feature, from varying viewpoints, the cluster of small houses which lies beside the locks at the mouth of the canal. Here he has chosen a direct view of the canal banks, resulting in the division of the canvas into horizontal bands representing the sky, the far bank and the foreground. He has used different types of brushwork to create light effects on different surfaces. The expanse of sky is smooth, the house and outbuildings are clearly delineated and throw deep shadows, while long, criss-crossed brush strokes are used to convey the reeds and foliage on the near banks.

Thomas Roberts' carefully composed landscape.
Although Roberts is best known for his topographical views, his own preference was for the classical landscape. This type of painting does not illustrate anywhere in particular; instead it aims to produce a calm and harmonious effect through the careful arrangement of a compositional view. The French artist Claude, a century earlier, had established a series of rules for executing such views: the foreground area, painted in dark colours, should recede to the distant horizon by using colours that gradually become paler. Distance could be created by the device of placing trees or hills to either side of the picture. Human figures, animals, ruins, rivers, trees and shrubbery were placed carefully with the composition to lead the viewer through the landscape.
Roberts' composition is of the Claudian format. A large landscape, framed by trees, shrubbery and a high craggy hill, is opened up to the left of centre by a serpentine rive moving to distant hills beyond. The viewer is carefully led through this idyllic place, passing the figures and animals in the right foreground, towards the expanse of the still waters, on to the ruined Gothic church overlooking the river, and finally to the horizon.

An early work by David.
This oil sketch, a student work, was painted by David while he was studying in Rome. It is an example of the artist's ambitious attempt to cast off rococo influences and assume instead a purer, more lucid, classical style. The resulting canvas is a panoramic mise-en-scene. This was an important movement in the artist's development towards his mature neoclassical style.
The scene depicts the climactic close of Homer's Iliad. Achilles mourns Patroclus (who was slain by Hector), on the raised bier in front of the great funeral pyre. In vindication of his friend's death, Achilles has ordered that Hector's naked and twisted body be tied by the ankles to his chariot, and dragged around the city walls.
The theme of the virtue of sacrifice for one's country was popular among neoclassical artists. David exhibited the picture in Rome in 1778 (despite it being dated 1779). It was then sent to Paris, along with works by other students of the French Academy in Rome, to allow the Academicians to judge his progress.

Tissot's depiction of the Faust legend.
Tissot painted a series of works that depicted the Faust legend. The story of Faust dates back to the 16th century: a doctor who travelled widely, he reportedly worked magic cures before dying in mysterious circumstances. The legend that quickly grew up around him maintained that he had made a pact with the devil, trading his soul for youth, knowledge and magical powers. The most celebrated version of the legend was written by Goethe in the early 19th century, and it was he who introduced the character of Marguerite. Tissot depicts Marguerite in church, struggling with her crisis of faith. A representation of the Last Judgement on the wall behind her, the intent prayer of the two young children at the altar on the left, and the void that divides them, heighten her sense of spiritual isolation. Costume-pieces like this were typical of Tissot's early work, when the Belgian artist Barron Henri Leys was an influence on him.

Moynan's narrative painting.
The scene takes place in a village, thought to be Leixlip, in Co. Kildare. On the street, some ragged, barefoot and mischievous-looking children are playing at being a military band.
Their musical instruments are ordinary households objects: pots and pans, tin boxes, buckets and saucepan lids. Passers-by stop to watch the make-believe band, while the children pause to tease a soldier walking with his girlfriend on the pavement. The trooper has been identified as a member of the Fourth Royal Irish Dragoon Guards, a regiment based in Ireland during the 1880s. He wears the walking-out uniform of the cavalry regiment. He recognises that the leader of the children's musical 'ensemble' is wearing the regimental band helmet-and clearly is not amused.
'Military Manouvres' is a superb example of a painting that emphasises the element of storytelling. Moynan produced a number of beautifully painted pictures of this type. He first studied medicine but then decided to become an artist. After training in Dublin he went to Antwerp and was in Paris by 1884. He developed his reputation as a portrait painter, although his greatest strenght arguably lies in his wittily observant scenes of everyday life.

The attraction of Brittany to 19th Century Irish artists.
Painted in Concarneau during the winter of 1881-1882, this is one of the most ambitious Breton canvases executed by the artist. It was exhibited at the Paris Salon of 1882. Thaddeus had studied in Paris in 1880-1881 before coming to Brittany. Many artists were attracted to this picturesque part of France with its air of the exotic.
The painting shows the beach at Concarneau, where a young woman in typical Breton costume pauses to inspect the local shellfish and chestnuts. Resting on her hip is a basket of leeks. The artist pays great attention to the depiction of clothes, lavishing attention on the wonderfully elaborate lace collar and fetching salmon pink and white bonnet. Her eye-catching apparel is in striking contrast to the plain garments of the old woman beside the brazier and the rather awkward youth intent on selling the local shellfish.
This is a masterly 'plein-air' scene combining immense interest in detail with a very open composition, which leads the eye through the market to the flat expanse of coast beyond. In the manner of the realist painter Jules Breton, Thaddeus is likely to have posed the young woman in his studio. She is more crisply painted than the other figures in the picture, and the colours used to describe her contrast strongly with the more muted tones of the background.

Steen's riff on Raphael's 'The School of Athens'.
The miracle of Christ turning water into wine at the marriage feast, told only in St John's Gospel, is here submerged within a lively inn scene. Steen includes a wealth of detail, such as a drunkard encouraged to return home by his long-suffering wife, and the ornately dressed guests and servants below the stairs. The overall composition wittily derives from Raphael's monumental 'School of Athens' fresco in the Vatican. The young man in orange, who gestures towards the fountain, or water of life, and looks towards Christ, underlies the true meaning of the miracle and reminds us that wine should be enjoyed in measure. The innkeeper can be taken as an idealised self-portrait, given Steen's ownership of both an inn and a brewery during a peripatetic life that took him to three masters while he was training, and to various cities to live.
The quality and finish of Steen's pictures varies greatly. Some of his best date from the period of 1661-70, when he lived near Haarlem.

GA©rard's skill at painting textiles and costume.
GA©rard quickly became one of the principal portraitists to the imperial court of Napoleon I. This is one of five portraits painted by the artist - at the height of his power - for Napoleon's Salon de Famille at the Palais de Saint-Cloud. In a letter of September 1808 its commission is recorded.
Marie-Julie Clary was the elder daughter of a wealthy Marseilles family, reputedly of Irish descent. Her sister DesirA©e was a renowned beauty who became engaged to Napoleon Bonaparte at the age of 15. Although that engagement was eventually broken off, Marie-Julie married Napoleon's brother Joseph in 1794. Her large dowry saved the Bonapartes from penury, and allowed Joseph the means to pursue his political career. Daughter ZA©naide was born in 1801, and Charlotte the following year. In 1806 Joseph became King of Naples and in 1808 King of Spain, a title he held in name until 1814.
GA©rard's highly polished finish faithfully captures the fashionable interior, and renders the textures of the muslin and voile and satin dresses. ZA©naide inherited the picture, and it's remained in her family until 1972.

Morphy's realistic portrayal of textures.
In this half-lenght portrait Garret Morphy depicts the youngest son of the 3rd Viscount Molineaux, who succeeded to the title in 1700. He is wearing armour and holding a baton. A creamy white neckcloth, fringed with gold thread, is knotted at his throat, and he sports a high, full wig made from real white hair in a style that was fashionable around 1700. The portrait is striking for the almost hyper-realism of the texture seen in the different materials: the hard sheen of the armour, the soft material of the scarf, the coarse texture of the wig.
Little is known about the early life of Garret Morphy. It is believed that he was in London in 1673, but it is unclear whether or not he had begun his artistic training in Ireland.
Morphy's patrons and the circles in which he moved in England and Ireland were largely Jacobite. Later in his career he painted important English administrators and military leaders in Ireland.

A Fauve portrait in the National Gallery of Ireland.
Born in Holland, van Dongen was a member of the Fauve group that flourished in Paris from 1905 to c. 1909, and included Matisse and Vlaminck. The Fauves used vivid colours to express feelings and emotions, and the effect was shocking for their contemporaries.
Van Dongen, inspired by the example of Toulouse-Lautrec, painted the nightlife of Montmartre and other similar areas of Paris, and Stella is probably a 'demi-mondaine'. She is portrayed in the violent, dissonant colours that are the hallmark of the powerful fauve portraits of women executed by the artist between 1905 and 1910. He uses the hot, unrealistic pinks and purples to express the woman's personality and convey her seductive charm. These are balanced by the cool greens used to shade the neck and arm. Forms are flattened and simplified, and yet van Dongen seeks to create volume, and van Dongen seeks to create volume, and to raise Stella in relief from the picture surface, by adding a bold outline (along the right side) reinforced by the heavy yellow hatchings which follows the contour of her head and shoulders.

Bishop Clayton and his wife.
This double portrait of Bishop Clayton and his wife Katherine dates from the early years of their marriage, which took place in 1728. Clayton was successively Bishop of Killala, Bishop of Cork and Ross, and Bishop of Clogher. He travelled extensively on the Continent and was regarded by all who knew him as a man of culture and taste. His wife was the daughter of a former Lord Chief Justice of the Exchequer. In this portrait the Bishop is seated at a table holding an open book. The figure is solidly painted in a realistic manner, distinguished by well-observed details such as the depiction of shadow under the nose and chin area. The billowing clerical robe is lavishly executed in flowing, swirling strokes of paint. In the manner of portraits of the 18th century, Katherine Clayton is presented as a less forceful personality than her husband: it is her elegance and femininity that are stressed. This is achieved by the carefully arranged, graceful pose.
Latham enrolled in the Guild of St Luke in Antwerp in 1724, remaining there for one term. He was working in Dublin from 1725 and enjoyed a successful career as a portrait painter in Ireland. The vast majority of Latham's portraits are bust-length, and often are painted in oval format.

Raeburn's realistic double portrait.
Sir John Clerk (c.1740-1798), 5th Baronet, was descended from a rich merhant who had built Penicuik House, near Edinburgh. He followed intellectual pursuits typical of the Scottish Enlightenment, and married Rosemary Dacre from Cumberland in 1777. Their tender relationship is amply conveyed in this double portrait, judged to be one of Raeburn's finest paintings. While the device of couples promenading before an imaginary landscape had been used earlier by Gainsborough, Reynolds and Romney, here there is a convincing rendering of the scrubby landscape found in the Pentland hills, and the two figures are fully integrated with it through gesture and back-lighting. Sunlight is the key factor as it catches a winding river, the tree, Sir John's coat and his wife's cheek. It is reflected back from her muslin dress to him, underlining the bond between them.
Raeburn had spent two years studying in Rome. On opening his first studio in 1786 he strove to recapture the mood of Italy in a series of full-size portraits set in landscape, unlike the technique of his more familiar later paintings.

VelA¡zquez's earliest known painting.
VelA¡zquez is indisputably the greatest Spanish artist of his age. Born in Seville, at the time a very cosmopolitan city and capital of commerce with the New World, he trained for approximately six years in Francisco Pacheco's studio, a meeting place for intellectuals. In 1618 he married Pacheco's daughter.
VelA¡zquez was influenced by Pacheco, and by the early naturalism of artists such as Pedro de Campagna and Juan de Roelas. However, probable contacts with works by some of the followers of Caravaggio, such as Bartolomeo Cavarozzi, should not be underestimated.
Our canvas is widely considered to be the earliest known picture by VelA¡zquez. The religious theme is treated in more or less the same way as the similar Flemish subjects of the late 16th century. The miraculous event depicted in the background leaves room in the foreground for a display of ordinary kitchen objects, attended by a Moorish servant.
The symbolic significance relates to charity, and for this reason it has been suggested that the original location of the painting could have been the refectory of a convent. Particularly impressive is the realistic foreshortening of the dishes, and the use of a limited palette of browns, ochres and whites.

Goya's theatrical portrait.
The sitter was a famous actress, the daughter of Pedro de ZA¡rate ValdA©s, also an actor. She married the singer Bernardo Gil y Aguado and their son Antonio Gil y ZA¡rate was to become a renowned poet and playwright.
In the picture her black dress and lace mantilla create a strong contrast with the yellow sofa on which she sits. In her hand she holds a fleco, a fan, and her arms are covered with white, silky, fingerless gloves. Her gaze is slightly melancholic, while a pinch of irony appears in her smile. This painting is among a number of beautiful female portraits that Goya executed before the Peninsula War. He greatly admired the theatre and its protagonists, and painted many of their portraits. A few years later the seA±ora ZA¡rate sat for him again, and that portrait, on a smaller scale, is today in the Hermitage Museum, St Petersburg.

Vermeer's painting stolen.
In 1986, a 13-strong gang headed by Martin Cahill, the Dublin crime chief who was later shot dead by the IRA, stole 18 works from Russborough House in Co.Wicklow. This painting by Vermeer was amongst those stolen. Thankfully it was recovered seven years later, in 1993, near Antwerp.

George Barret's Sublime view of Powerscourt.
This portrayal of the waterfall at Powerscourt is one of a number of pictures by George Barret featuring the famous cascade with its impressive 116-metre falls. The artist spent several years painting at the Powerscourt estate. The composition stresses the 'sublime' in nature, a concept popularised by the noted philosopher, orator and writer, Edmund Burke. He maintained that what was sublime in nature was vast, awesome, terrible and uncontrollable, whereas the picturesque was denoted by smallness, tranquillity, gentleness and sweetness.
In order to impress the viewer with the sheer scale of the torrent of water, the artist places a group of tiny figures in the left foreground of the picture. Their size contrasts sharply with the huge trees - themselves planted to enhance the scene- while the high cliffs above reinforce the grandeur of this wonder of nature. 
Barret has chosen to depict the scene in midsummer, and the verdant trees, the lush growth on the cliffs and the Italianate golden light of evening that reflects on the foaming water are superbly handled in paint.

An accomplished study of the nude by William Mulready.
A group of young women are depicted nude, bathing from the rocky banks of a stream. Behind, a woman, holding a child in her arms, calls out urgently that someone is coming. The two women behind her appear to clutch each other alarm. One of the naked figures has already begun to rise from her prone position on the rocks, while another springs from the water, her long hair streaming behind her as she does so. Their dramatic response suggests that it is a male stranger who is about to invade their privacy. Yet the foreground figure seems unperturbed by the news. Her gaze is unfixed and she absent-mindedly fingers her hair. 
This accomplished study of the nude as seen from several angles is a logical development of Mulready's superb academic drawings, which were greatly admired by Queen Victoria. He had trained at the Royal Academy in London but continued to take life-drawing classes until late in his career. His depiction of the nude links him to the traditions of Western European art - to the antique and the Italian School. The foreground figure owes a debt to Titian's Venus Anadyomene and the study of figures in different poses to Michelangelo's Bathers cartoon.

Symbolism in Yeats' Liffey Swim.
In The Liffey Swim Jack B. Yeats captures the atmosphere and thrill of an event that has been part of Dublin's annual sporting calendar since 1920. The swim, held between late July and early August, was promoted in 1923 as 'the biggest free spectacle of the year in Dublin'. The competitors raced from Victoria Quay to the Butt Bridge, a mile and a half downriver, where prizes were awarded to the first six home. In the uncertain atmosphere of Dublin in the early 1920s, the Liffey Swim was a celebratory event, in which citizens, regardless of age or class, could participate in either a competitive or supportive capacity. The early races were even scheduled to take place in the evening to allow people to attend after work.
In his painting, Yeats invites his audience to engage with the event by cleverly placing them among the people. The crowd leans forward, drawing the viewer's eye to the swimmers, who have reached a key point in the race and surge towards the finish line. By distorting the perspective, Yeats allows his picture to encompass the entire occasion. In the foreground, spectators jostle for position, while people on trams crane to catch a glimpse of the race. It is likely that the character in the brown fedora is the artist himself, and the woman wearing the elaborate yellow hat his wife Cottie. Yeats was awarded a silver medal for The Liffey Swim at the Paris Olympic exhibition in 1924.

Jacob's mistake.
According to the Book of Genesis, Joseph brought his two sons before his father Jacob to be blessed. The blind old man, unexpectedly, crossed his arms and blessed Ephraim, his younger grandson, with his right hand, thus favouring him over the first-born brother. In the picture Jacob's action is clearly expressed, as is the disbelief of Joseph and of his elder son Manasseh. Guercino paid particular attention to the prophetic pose of Jacob's hands in the sign of the cross. This was considered highly symbolic by the Catholic authorities, because it was from the young boy's descendants that Christ was born.
The artist was known throughout his life as Guercino (the squinter), due to a problem with his vision. Practically self-taught as a painter, he soon acquired an outstanding taste for colour and naturalism. This painting was commissioned by Cardinal Jacopo Serra, Papal Legate in Ferrara. The title of knight was conferred upon the artist as a consequence of this and other works.

A complex allegorical work by Tiepolo.
Although Tiepolo painted the subject several times, the Dublin example is considered to be the most complex and the most charged with religious meaning.
Surrounded by angels, the Eternal God receives the Virgin with open arms. On his head the triangular halo signifies the Trinity. The Virgin is kneeling in devotion, and from the sky above the Holy Spirit sheds his light upon her. She is crowned with stars, while the crescent moon, the terrestrial globe and the snake of Original Sin are at her feet. All these images are associated with the Lady of the Apocalypse - a symbol of purity and the prefiguration of the Immaculate Conception - as are the obelisk, the angel holding a mirror and the palm. They are all references to the Virgin's virtues.
The format, as well as the sketchy handling of this picture, indicate that it was a study for a fresco or a large canvas, which Tiepolo possibly did not have the time to carry out.

James Barry's self-portrait as Timanthes.
This half-length portrait is based on a description by Pliny the Elder of a lost painting by the ancient Greek artist Timanthes. It was begun around 1780; Barry initially used it for his representation of Timanthes in a painting for the Great Room at the Society of Arts in London. Later, in 1804, he was requested by the Society to provide a self-portrait, to be reproduced in engraved form for a published volume of the Society's transactions for that year. In his reply to the Society Barry Mentions that he had completed the portrait the summer before.
He represents himself wearing a red coat with a yellow waistcoat and white shirt underneath. His neck is adorned with a black ribbon. He holds aloft a painting of a Cyclops, the one-eyed giant who, according to Homer, devoured human flesh. In the background, satyrs gaze in fear at the giant. The windswept tree and active volcano silhouetted against the sky add to the sense of drama. Behind the artist is the base of the famous Hellenistic statue the 'Lacoeon', a cast of which stood in Barry's studio. The artist's deliberate placement of himself between the statue and the painting was intended to reflect his ability to survive adversity.

A Sublime interpretation of the Book of Revelations by Francis Danby.
The catastrophic event shown in this work is based on lines from the Book of Revelations (6:12-17) whereby on the opening of the Sixth Seal the earth explodes and bursts into disarray. In the painting the sky is lit up naturally, a volcano has erupted violently, lava spills forth, and lighting strikes a mountain top with great force. Cities are collapsing, and their inhabitants call upon the earth to fall on them and hide them from the wrath of god.
In order to convey the terror and drama of the apocalyptic event, Francis Danby paints his scene onto a very large canvas. He employs a palette of darkest browns, fiery reds, grey and vibrant whites to vividly conjure up what is happening. The puniness of the figures against the massive scale of the landscape forcefully conveys the idea that human beings are not in control of the world they inhabit. Nature has been unleashed, and they are powerless to prevent it. In dramatic works such as this one, Danby displays his awareness of the Romantic movement that was sweeping across Europe during the 19th century.
Danby was a master of spectacular scenes. Indeed this painting proved to be so popular when exhibited at the Royal Academy (London) Exhibition of 1828 that it was moved to a separate gallery because of the huge crowds it attracted.

Helen Mabel Trevor on Breton life.
Helen Trevor felt a great rapport with the mothers of the fishermen whom she met in Brittany. This painting presents a three-quarter-length figure of an old woman, seated, leaning on a stick and facing the spectator. The figure which dominates the foreground of the canvas, is an imposing one. The piercing eyes with their direct, unflinching gaze immediately suggest the strength of character required of these women, whose husbands and sons faced constant danger at sea. The hands that rest on the cane, entwined with rosary beads, are witness to a life of hard work endured with the aid of a steadfast religious faith.
Trevor began her art training relatively late in life. She studied at the Royal Academy, London, then in Paris, and first visited Brittany in 1881. Her Breton subjects include sentimental pictures of school-children, studies of elderly women and woodland scenes in the manner of the Barbizon school. She was especially interested in the lives of Breton fishing people, their customs and traditions. She exhibited a small number of Breton scenes in Dublin, London and Paris. This painting was shown at the Paris Salon in 1893, at the Royal Academy in 1895, and later the same year at the Royal Hibernian Academy, Dublin.

The Marriage of Strongbow and Aoife.
This exceptionally large canvas depicts an event traditionally regarded as pivotal in Ireland's history. The picture narrates the episode when the Normans, who had settled in England in 1066, were provided with the opportunity to invade Ireland. This was presented to them by Dermot McMurrough, the King of Leinster, who had been expelled from his kingdom. He sought assistance from the Norman leader, Richard de Clare, known as Strongbow. In return for his help McMurrough promised Strongbow the hand of his daughter, Aoife, in marriage, and pledged that subsequent to his death he would succeed to the title of King of Leinster. After Strongbow had captured the city of Waterford he married Aoife on the battlefield. Later generations saw this union as the first confirmation of Ireland's loss of freedom, a loss that was to endure for seven-and-a-half centuries.
The occupation of Ireland is symbolised by the figure of an old harp-player clutching his instrument with broken strings. It is reinforced in the proud stance of Strongbow, who tramples on an overthrown cross decorated with early Irish Christian art. The figures of the defeated Irish are adorned with a variety of ornaments, a reminder of their proud Celtic heritage. Prior to designing the picture, the artist consulted his Irish antiquarian friends in an attempt to ensure that the costumes and weaponry were correct in every detail. In this picture the artist's Romantic, nationalist sympathies are to the fore. It is thought that he may have intended that his painting should recall contemporary tragedies such as the unsuccessful 1848 Young Irelander Rebellion and the 1845-1850 Famine, as well as recording an important episode of medieval history.
Maclise was one of the most successfull history painters of his day. At the peak of his career he was commissioned to produce several paintings for the Houses of Parliament in London. This work, extremely accomplished and ambitious in terms of scale, design and execution, serves as apt testimony to his skill.

The Taking of Christ.
Throughout history, very few artists have caused as radical a change in pictorial perceptions as Caravaggio. From the moment his talent was discovered, he swiftly became the most famous painter of his time in Italy, as well as a source of inspiration for hundreds of followers throughout Europe.
The Taking of Christ was painted by Caravaggio for the Roman Marquis Ciriaco Mattei at the end of 1602, when he was at the height of his fame. Breaking with the past, the artist offered a new visual rendering of the narrative of the Gospels, reducing the space around the three-quarter-length figures and avoiding any description of the setting. All emphasis is directed on the action perpetrated by Judas and the Temple guards on an overwhelmed Jesus, who offers no resistance to his destiny. The fleeing disciple in disarray on the left is St John the Evangelist. Only the moon lights the scene: although the man at the far side is holding a lantern, it is in reality an ineffective source. In that man's features Caravaggio portrayed himself, at the age of 31, as a passive spectator of the divine tragedy.

MicheA¡l MacLiammA3ir and his multiple personas.
MicheA¡l MacLiammA3ir (Alfred Lee Willmore) the actor, writer and impresario, was born in London. While touring Ireland with Anew McMaster's Shakespearian Company he met Hilton Edwards. Together they founded Dublin's Gate Theatre in 1928, which became a showcase for modern plays and design. MacLiammA3ir's one-man show The Importance of Being Oscar (1960) brought him international renown. Brandt shows the flamboyant actor seated in a gilt chair, while in the wings she illustrates three of the actor's different personas.

Leech's garden of light and colour.
A novice is shown deep in spiritual meditation. With prayer book in hand she gazes upward as if in direct communication with Heaven itself. Behind, in the shadows of a tree-lined walled garden, are a group of nuns, walking in prayer. While they are dressed in plain religious garb, the novice is robed like a bride. Novices traditionally wore bridal costume on the day they took their final vows, as a symbol of becoming brides of Christ.
Sunlight streams into the garden. It falls on the lace habit and bonnet of the young novice, revealing the slim, elegant form beneath. The garment's delicate shades of mauve and lilac, as well as white and green, reflect the colour of the flowers and grass close by. The thick strokes of colour show Leech's interest in Impressionism and also suggest the influence of Van Gogh. This is offset, however, by the careful drawing and paintwork in the girl's figure. Her stillness set against the waving leaves and grass provides an interesting note of contrast in the picture.
The setting is Concarneau in Brittany. This picturesque part of France held a special attraction for Leech, as it did for many other artists. He visited the area frequently between 1903 and 1917. In 1904 Leech contracted typhoid and convalesced in a local hospital run by the Sisters of the Holy Ghost. It is this garden which is represented in the picture. The model for the novice is Saurin Elizabeth Kerlin, the artist's first wife.

About Lawrence Weiner
Lawrence Weiner was born in the Bronx, New York in 1942. Weiner now lives and works in New York and Amsterdam. He was a leading pioneer of Conceptual art in the US in the late sixties and early seventies. His work often takes the form of typographic texts. He is largely concerned with language, particularly the way in which meaning is carried in words, signs, symbols and codes. Context forms the content of Weiner's work in which the traditional art object is by-passed in favour of language as the medium through which meaning is presented.Weiner is associated with the Conceptual wing of Postminimalism, along with artists such as Joseph Kosuth and Sol LeWitt.
In 1968, Weiner wrote "Declaration of Intent":
1. The artist may construct the piece.
2. The piece may be fabricated.
3. The piece need not be built.
Each being equal and consistent with the intent of the artist the decision as to condition rests with the receiver upon the occasion of receivership.

Beneath the 'bow.
Although simple and minimalist in their appearance, Michael Warren's outdoor sculptures are often monumental and sometimes even seem to defy gravity. This sculpture was situated at the Irish Museum of Modern Art in 1991, the same year in which IMMA first opened its doors to the public. This sculpture is called Beneath the 'bow ('bow is reputedly an abbreviation of rainbow).
Beneath the 'bow is sculpted from mature Irish oak, about 150 years old.  The metal inserted into the wood is Corten steel, a rusty-looking weathering metal alloy associated with marine transportation. 
From Michael Warren in 1987:
my sculpture, like Chinese script,
reads downwards:
limit is imposed by space;
space has weight.
Void is emptiness 
filled with space,
sculpture,
the ratio of space to matter- 
the awareness of limit.

About Michael Warren.
Michael Warren was born in Gorey, Wexford in 1950. Early on he was aware of the work of OisA­n Kelly (1915-81) and Gerda Froemel (1931-75), but the significant formative influence on the young Warren was his art teacher at St Columba's, Frank Morris (1928-70). His outdoor works have been commissioned and displayed internationally. In Ireland his sculptures are sited at significant public centres, such as outside Dublin City Council's civic offices (1994) in Wood Quay.  His work Gateway (2002) was originally outside the Pavillions in Dun Laoghaire.
The strength of his work lies in his ability to combine autonomous elements which retain their own tension, rhythm and relationship to the others.

About Fergus Martin.
Born in Cork in 1955, Fergus Martin studied art at Dun Laoghaire School of Art from 1972 to 1976.  From 1979 to 1988 he lived and worked in Italy, where he lectured in the English language at the University of Milan. In 1988, he returned to full-time painting and has been living and working in Dublin since. In 1991 he attended the New York Studio School of Drawing, Painting and Sculpture.
Martin has exhibited in Ireland, France, Germany, Italy and America.  His work is included in public collections in Ireland, including those of the Irish Museum Modern Art and Dublin City Gallery The Hugh Lane, as well as many Irish and international private collections. He received awards from The Pollock-Krasner Foundation, New York, in 1999 and 2006, and was awarded The Marten Toonder Award by The Arts Council in 1999. In 2001 he was elected a member of AosdA¡na.

About Liam Gillick.
British conceptual artist Liam Gillick was born in 1964 in Aylesbury, U.K. He is often associated with the Young British Artists.
Gillick's practice is difficult to categorise. As an artist, critic, curator, designer, and writer, his work includes: public projects, critical writings, design, films, and musical scores. His art is underpinned by rigorous theorizing but is always shaped by a very visual awareness of the way different properties of materials, structures and colour can affect our surroundings and therefore influence the way we behave.
Gillick was nominated for the Turner Prize in 2002.
He lives and works in London and New York.

About Ulrich Rueckriem.
Ulrich Rueckriem was born in 1938 in Duesseldorf. He trained as a stonemason and worked at Cologne Cathedral between 1959 and 1961. From 1963 to 1969 he worked in a studio in Schloss Noervenich near Dueren. 
Strongly influenced by Minimalism, Rueckriem's sculptural works celebrate geometric form while retaining all marks of the artist's tools and the natural structural lines of the stone. He concentrated on principles of form, in each case cutting a block of stone (of irregular or geometrical shape) into regular sections and then reassembling it. Rueckriem sought to relate his sculptures to public spaces. His work and ideas on public art proved highly influential. His insistence on making intelligible all traces of his intervention with the material made him an important figure in establishing Process art as a response to Minimalism.
For thirteen years, from 1988 to 2001, Rueckriem lived in Clonegal, Co. Carlow. His work has been exhibited internationally, including solo exhibitions at the Museum Ludwig, Koeln, the Sprengel Museum, Hanover, and the Neue Nationalgalerie, Berlin.

(...) WATER & SAND + STICKS & STONES (...).
This artwork is concerned with language and the way meaning is carried in words, signs, symbols, and codes.  Many people think of art as being some type of object in a gallery. Weiner by-passes this traditional idea of the art object. Instead he uses language as the medium through which meaning is presented.
The picture here shows a different configuration of this artwork was placed indoors at IMMA; upstairs on the first floor landing as part the artist's exhibition Projects. Since 1993 when the work has been presented both in IMMA's galleries and at other locations around Ireland.
Context is integral to Weiner's work; the context for this particular artwork is the Royal Hospital Kilmainham, which is both a significant Irish building from the late 1600s, and also a modern national museum of contemporary art. Think about the language used here ... the four words presented here (water, sand, sticks, stones) trigger associations with building and construction. However the words are separated into two distinct groups connected by a plus sign (water and sand plus sticks and stones).  At the start and end of the text there are three full stops within brackets, an ellipsis that usually indicates the omission of a section of text, or a statement that trails off unfinished.

The Drummer.
Barry Flanagan (1941 - 2009) created artwork that featured animals such as elephants and horses, but he was best known for his sculptures of leaping and dancing hares.  Each hare sculpture has an individual or dynamic gesture; dancing, using a tool, engaging in a sport, or as seen here, playing a musical instrument.  Look closer at the surface of the sculpture. The artwork was created through a hands-on process of clay modelling.  This allowed Flanagan to invest the work with a dynamic sense of movement. Although cast in bronze, the mark of the artist's hand is still evident in the surface of this large work; you can see how clumps of clay were added and sculpted into shape.  
From Flanagan's official website: "When asked about the use of the hare motif Barry would describe the magical experience of seeing a hare running on the Sussex Downs. This event prompted the first Leaping Hare sculpture in 1979. For the Egyptians the hare represented life. In Chinese mythology the hare is the sole inhabitant of the moon and the symbol of immortality."
Paul Levy wrote "Flanagan's hares do not carry much of this historic symbolic baggage - they don't symbolise life, they live it."

Steel.
"One of the first thoughts I had was wanting the sculpture to give people a feeling of surprise and happiness every time they saw it. When I went to look at the gates, and looked up the avenue, I couldn't see where the building ended because the trees blocked the view of the sides to the left and right. It gave me the idea of a form that didn't appear to end. So these barrels are like cut chunks of a horizontal structure which could go on and on - like an underground river which surfaces here and there. If you think of them as surfacing on top of the pillars - ! - they're like startled - startling - visitors."

Signage for a 35 Floor Social Centre.
This artwork by Liam Gillick was created on the occasion of the exhibition .all hawaii eNtrA©es / luNar reGGae in 2006. The exhibition was curated by the French artist Philippe Parreno, and Rachael Thomas, Head of Exhibitions at IMMA. 
Gillick's artwork is located outside the building in which the exhibition was held. At that time the building was referred to as The New Galleries. The title of the exhibition was an anagram for "new galleries" in both English and Irish - all hawaii entrA©es / lunar reggae is also the text that is displayed around the circular top of the artwork.

8 Limestones cut to a specific size from rough blocks 150 x 50 x 50cm split into parts and reassembled, 1988.
Born in Dusseldorf in 1938, Ulrich Rueeckriem lived and worked in Clonegal, Co. Carlow for over 13 years (1988 to 2001). This sculpture was originally installed in Clonegal in a purpose-built sculpture shed, before being moved to IMMA, where it is displayed as an outdoor work.  Unlike traditional stone sculpture, where a piece of stone is cut, chiselled and polished, in Rueeckriem's work the marks made by the drills and chisels are not smoothed away.  The natural fracture lines in the rock are revealed; allowing the irregular lines to follow the internal structure of the stone.

About Barry Flanagan.
Barry Flanagan was born on 11 January 1941 in Prestatyn, in North Wales near Liverpool. He studied at Birmingham College of Art and Crafts in 1957 and 1958. He said of this time "I was a fully-fledged sculptor from the age of 17. I stepped right into it and embraced the physical world". Flanagan then attended St Martin's School of Art, London, from 1964 to 1966.
Throughout the late 1960s, Flanagan created temporary works of poured sand and draped cloth and his own upright biomorphic forms made of stitched, dyed hessian filled with plaster and sand, who began his artistic career pioneering the use of humble materials - such as the hessian, sand, plaster, rope, sticks and stones later associated with, for example his soft sculpture 'aaing j gni aa' was bought by the Tate in 1969.
From the 1980s onwards, Flanagan became best known for his sculptures of hares, often leaping, dancing and playful. Modelled in clay and then cast in bronze, these artworks have a dynamic sense of movement.
Flanagan represented Britain at the 1982 Venice Biennale.
In 1991 he was elected to the Royal Academy and he received the OBE. Major retrospectives of his work were held in 1993 at FundaciA3n 'la Caixa,' Madrid, and in 2000 at the Tate Liverpool.
In 2006, Flanagan had an extensive solo exhibition at IMMA. As part of this exhibition, his work was also exhibited at The Dublin City Art Gallery, The Hugh Lane, including ten monumental hare sculptures that lined the middle of Dublin's O'Connell Street. During an interview in the same year, Flanagan said "I enjoy the third dimension and I appreciate material in time and space. I find it exciting to the eyes". 
At different points in his life he lived and worked in London, Dublin and Ibiza.
Flanagan died on 31 August 2009 in Santa EulA ria des Riu, Ibiza.

Eve with Apple.
Irish sculptor Edward Delaney created Eve with Apple in 1958. The sculpture was inspired by the scenes of poverty that Delaney encountered in post-war Germany in the 1950s, when the artist was based at the Academie der Bildenden Kunst.
In an interview, Delaney described a scene near his lodgings in Munich. 'There was a bench by the side of the street where a few old women sat, tired from long journeys in search of aid, worn and twisted, also, from old age. Every time they raised a hand in a gesture it seemed as if they were imploring the skies for assistance. I wanted to make statues so that (we) would never forget them and so that other people might see in bronze these symbols of the mystery of agony - and life surviving in spite of agony.'  
In 2004, Peter Murray wrote in the Irish Arts Review that "the poverty of Germany made a profound impression on the artist, providing stark images which would reappear in his later work in Ireland. His achievement lay in his ability to unite the instinctive, unpretentious approach of his rural background, where memories of the Great Famine were still alive in the memories of people, with the stricken anxiety evident in post-war Germany (...)"
In a similar assessment in the Irish Times, Aidan Dunne connected Delaney to "the broad post-war tradition of European figurative sculpture, such as Giacometti, Germaine Richier, Marino Marini and Giacomo Manzu. These artists shared a commitment to figuration, to modelling and casting, and to bronze."
Before it was permanently located here in the grounds of IMMA, the sculpture underwent restoration, which was kindly funded by the Goethe-Institut, with help from the Heritage Council.

Putti from the statue of Queen Victoria, once on Leinster Lawn.
These three stone putti were part of a large memorial to Queen Victoria which was once located outside Dublin's Leinster House, now the National Parliament (Oireachtas).
The statue was commissioned after Queen Victoria's death, and was created by John Hughes RHA (1865-1941). It was unveiled in February 1908. The giant plinth was designed by Thomas Manly Deane. 
The stuatue had a central triangular plinth with a stuate of Victoria, just below her, at the angles, sat the three putti that can now be found at IMMA. Sitting lower down, and occupying the long face of each triangular side, were three further sculptures - Hibernia at War, Hibernia at Peace and Fame.

About Brian O'Doherty.
Brian O'Doherty was born in 1928 in Roscommon. O'Doherty studied medicine at University College Dublin. His art career began when he exhibited paintings at the Royal Hibernian Academy and the Irish Exhibition of Living Art in the 1950s. In 1958 O'Doherty relocated to Massachusetts to continue his medical studies. From this time he began working in television and journalism. O'Doherty was editor of 'Art in America' between 1971 and 1974. He taught film and art criticism for 25 years at Barnard College and has written a number of books.
In his art practice, O'Doherty has consistently explored the multiple nature of identity, adopting various personae, most notably Patrick Ireland between 1972 and the burial of this alter ego here at IMMA in 2008.

About Iran do EspA­rito Santo.
One of Brazil's most interesting contemporary artists, Iran do EspA­rito Santo was born in Mococa in 1963.
EspA­rito Santo is best known for his sensuously minimalist work that deals with issues of place, structure, material, design, and surface with a rigorous conceptual sensibility. His work undertakes a subtle subversion of Minimalism through abstracted everyday items. He is concerned with the tactile attributes of his chosen materials and with the sensuous contours of simple abstract forms in space. Working in granite, marble, sandstone, stainless steel, glass, copper, stone or paint on plaster, he employs subtle illusionistic devices, instigating a play of depth that remains consistent from piece to piece.
Also known for site-specific projects that mimic architectural elements, in En Passant (2008) do EspA­rito Santo used fine gradations of gray paint to depict light falling across a long gallery wallaa comment on the relationship between natural and pictorial light. EspA­rito Santo transforms industrial design items, such as Phillipe Starck lamps and old fashioned candlesticks, into iconic minimalist sculptures.
In 1986 EspA­rito Santo studied at the FundaA§A£o Armando Alvares Penteado, SA£o Paolo. In 2002, Sean Kelly Gallery presented the first North American gallery exhibition. His works have been exhibited widely in museums and galleries worldwide; and have been included in the collections of many prominent US museums, such as the MoMA, SFMOMA, and the MoCA, San Diego. His works have been included in the Venice Biennale, the Bienal de SA£o Paulo, and the Istanbul Biennal. EspA­rito Santo has also exhibited worldwide, including a significant solo exhibition at IMMA in 2006.
He lives and works in SA£o Paulo.

About Michael KliA«n.
KliA«n was born in Hollbrunn, Austria (1973) and grew up in Vienna. Emerging as a leading voice in contemporary choreography, KliA«n's artistic practice encompasses interdisciplinary thinking, critical writing, curatorial projects, and centrally, choreographic works equally at home in the Performing as well as the Fine Arts. Slattery's Lamp has been created during KliA«n's artistic directorship of Daghdha Dance Company (2003-2011). He lives with his wife and daughter alternately in Greece and Ireland.

About Janet Mullarney.
Irish artist Janet Mullarney (born 1952) in Dublin studied at the Accademia di Belle Arti and Scuola Professionale di Intaglio in Florence. Incorporating an extensive range of materials including bronze, wood, plaster, foam, cloth, glass and wax, her dynamic sculptural works reference religious iconography, art history and human relationships. Mullarney's work is represented in many public collections including that of the Arts Council, OPW, IMMA and Dublin City Gallery, The Hugh Lane. She now divides her time between studios in Ireland and Italy.
Born in Dublin, she frequented the Accademia di Belle Arti and Scuola Professionale di Intaglio in Florence, and spends her time between Italy and Ireland. She has traveled extensively and in recent years to India and Mexico and Egypt. Her work is clearly influenced by these sources, especially her knowledge of Italian art and medieval wood carving.
She has also been included in group and solo shows in Mexico, Italy, Belgium, the U.S., Canada and China. Her sculpture is included in numerous public collections such as the Irish Museum of Modern Art, The Hugh Lane Gallery, Dublin, the Arts Council, Limerick City Gallery of Art, Allied Irish Bank and public spaces such as Groningen, Holland and Royal Victoria Hospitals, Belfast.

About Edward Delaney.
Born in Claremorris, County Mayo in 1930, Edward Delaney left school at 14. Later he attended classes at the National College of Art, where he became increasingly interested in bronze sculpture. Afterwards, thanks to sponsorship from the Arts Council, as well as overseas fellowships and scholarships, he studied and worked in Munich, Bonn and Rome, and began showing his work on the world stage. He represented Ireland at the Biennale de Paris in 1959 and 1961, and at the New York World Fair in 1965. He lived in Dun Laoghaire where he set up a foundry and where most of his major public sculpture were created.
Much in demand as an artist during the 1960s and early 1970s, his public commissions for the Irish government included a statue of Wolfe Tone and a memorial sculpture to the Great Famine to be situated in St. Stephen's Green in Dublin, and a statue to Thomas Davis to be located on College Green, opposite Trinity College Dublin. Other important commissions included his Finnegan's Wake piece for the First National Bank of Chicago in Dame Street, the "Fountain Tree" at Smurfit Headquarters, Dublin, as well as major works for the ESB offices in Galway.
However, in the mid-1980s Delaney quit Dublin to move to Connemara, where he began a new phase of his life. Leaving behind his previous style of sculpture, he founded a sculpture park and began a series of experimental works called 'steel trees'.
Edward Delaney passed away on 23 September 2009, aged 79.

The Burial of Patrick Ireland.
After 36 years of making art as Patrick Ireland, the Irish-born artist reclaimed his birth name, Brian O'Doherty, during a symbolic funeral for his alter ego in the grounds of the Irish Museum of Modern Art on 20 May 2008.
The burial was intended as a gesture of reconciliation to mark the on-going peace process in Northern Ireland, just as the artist's action in assuming the name Patrick Ireland was a protest at the British military presence in Northern Ireland and the failure of the authorities to ensure civil rights for all. On the occasion of the performance, the artist said "We are burying hate. It's not often you get the chance to do that". 
The inscription is both in English and in Ogham Script. The earliest inscriptions in Ogham date to about the 4th century AD, but many place its invention within the 1st century BC.  The use of "classical" Ogham in stone inscriptions seems to have flowered in the 5th and 6th centuries around the Irish Sea. It appears that the Ogham alphabet was modelled on another script, and the largest number of scholars favours the Latin alphabet as this template.

Untitled / Corrections D.
In the sculpture entitled Correction, 2001 the artist takes the natural forms of solid granite blocks and applies cuts that follow the veins of the stones, turning them into geometric polyhedrons and thereby, cultural artefacts. EspA­rito Santo is particularly interested in the way his work lends itself to architecture and vice-versa. Ambiguity plays a central role in the artwork.  
Iran do EspA­rito Santo is known for sculptures in which everyday objects such as dice, light bulbs, and tin cans are abstracted into simplified geometric forms. Sometimes incorporating playful shifts in scale, do EspA­rito Santo's elegant objects subvert Minimalism's doctrine of non-objectivity.  

Slattery's Lamp.
A lamppost equipped with the capabilities to gain knowledge, to build meaning and to express itself. Originally conceived as a 'choreography of thought' this lamppost stood in Limerick gathering information from a local pub via sensors, processed them in its artificial mind and communicated the findings by flashing and dimming its light bulb. The work was transferred to IMMA in 2005 and since then Slattery's Lamp has been reworking its memories, at day and by night, in sleep and in dreams.
The work points to a rupture in everyday modes of perception: How can something seemingly defect and displaced be beautiful when granted meaning in itself? To fully perceive and engage with Slattery's Lamp remains an exercise in trust.
SLATTERY'S LAMP CREDITS
Concept: Michael KliA«n
Technical Design: Dave Guy
Software Design: Nick Rothwell
2004 (as part of E+VA, Limerick), 2005, collection IMMA 

Byzantine.
This sculpture by Janet Mullarney is entitled Byzantine. The word Byzantine triggers many associations, but Mullarney is most likely referring to the eastern empire which emerged from Rome's decline and lasted until the Fall of Constantinople in 1453.
"The Byzantine empire represented the political continuation of Rome, and Byzantine art developed out of the art of the Roman Empire (which was itself profoundly influenced by ancient Greek art). Although Byzantine art never lost sight of this classical heritage, it was also marked by the development of a new aesthetic. If classical art attempted to create representations that mimicked reality as closely as possible, Byzantine art seems to have abandoned this attempt in favour of a more symbolic approach."  This Byzantine anti-naturalism or abstracted aesthethic relates well to the look of these two sculpted arms at IMMA: their elongated, rounded form tapers out to tiny fingers.
The reference to classical sculpture from Europe's ancient empires is reinforced (perhaps with humour) when one considers the famous armless statues of antiquity, such as the Venus de Milo.

Bully's Acre.
Bully's Acre cemetery is one of Dublin's oldest graveyards. There has been activity on this site since the foundation of an abbey of St Maighneann in 606. Since then, monks, knights, princes, and the ordinary citizens of Dublin have been buried here. After his execution, rebel Robert Emmet's body was temporarily interred here before being removed in secrecy to be buried in an unmarked grave elsewhere. The poor of Dublin were buried here without charge. However a cholera epidemic in 1832 led to the graveyard being closed to the public. Body snatching was a regular activity during the 1700s and 1800s, and the graveyard was associated with "undignified behaviour" around the annual celebration of the Eve of St John (24th June).

Granite Cross, Bully's Acre.
Bully's Acre is one of Dublin's oldest cemeteries. Through the locked gates of the graveyard you can see a tall stone - probably the remains of a 10th-century granite cross that may have been part of the Abbey of St Maigneann, founded here in 606. It was here that Brian Boru (c.941-1014) camped on the eve of the Battle of Clontarf.  

About John Burgoyne.
Lieutenant-General John Burgoyne (24 February 1722 - 4 August 1792), became the Master of the Royal Hospital Kilmainham and Commander-in-Chief of Crown forces in Ireland in 1782. He was also privy councillor and colonel of the 4th regiment.
Burgoyne is remembered principally as the British General who was forced to surrender to the Americans at Saratoga in 1777.
In 1743 he eloped with Lady Charlotte Stanley, the daughter of the 11th Earl of Derby, and to escape creditors he lived in France between 1749 and 1755. He was a celebrated character in London society, and he was the model for the Devil's Disciple in Shaw's play from 1897, where he is nicknamed "Gentleman Johnny".
Burgoyne was author of the successful comedies The Maid of the Oaks(1774) and The Heiress (1786). In 1780 the comic opera The Lord of the Manor featured his libretto, based on Marmontel's Sylvain (1770).
He attended the Haymarket Theatre on 3 August 1792 and died suddenly the following day. He is buried in Westminster Abbey

Ferdia for nAth / Ferdia at the Ford.
With his sculpture 'Ferdia at the Ford' James McKenna (1933 - 2000) depicts a moment in the Irish epic the TA¡in (TA¡in BA3 CAoailnge). The sculpture is a continuation of McKenna's references to Irish history and mythology. The excerpts from the TA¡in below are from Joseph Dunn's 1914 English translation, although it is Thomas Kinsella's 1969 translation that is better known (with its illustrations by Louis le Brocquy).
Ferdia (or Ferdiad) is a legendary warrior of Irish mythology. In the TA¡in's conflict, Ferdiad finds himself on the opposite side to his best friend and foster-brother CAochulainn, with whom he has trained in arms. Their final confrontation takes place at a ford in a river. Ferdiad and CAochulainn are equal in battle skills, with two exceptions: CAochulainn has a special spear called the GA¡e Bulg, which enters the body in a single stab wound, but then opens into thirty barbs; and Ferdiad has 'horny skin', which no weapon can pierce.
Ferdiad says:
Let's haste to the encounter
To battle with this man;
The ford we will come to, (...)
To meet with CAochulainn, (...)
So that he may die!
CAochulainn says:
Despite all, we'll go there,
To fight on the ford!
Thou wast my heart's comrade,
My clan and my kinsman;
Ne'er found I one dearer;
Thy loss would be sad!
We were heart-companions once;
We were comrades in the woods;
We were men that shared a bed,
When we slept the heavy sleep,
After hard and weary fights.
Into many lands, so strange,
Side by side we sallied forth,
And we ranged the woodlands through,
When with Scathach we learned arms.
The TA¡in narrator tells us:
'Great indeed was the deed that was done on the ford that day. (...) Each of them was busy hurling at the other in those deeds of arms from early morning's gloaming till the middle of noon. When midday came, the rage of the men became wild, and each drew nearer to the other.'
'Such was the closeness of the combat they made, that they forced the river out of its bed and out of its course, so that there might have been a reclining place for a king or a queen in the middle of the ford, and not a drop of water was in it but what fell there with the trampling and slipping which the two heroes (...) made in the middle of the ford.'
Finally, CAochulainn manages to thrust the GA¡e Bulg underneath Ferdiad:
'... so that it cut its way through the body's protection into him, till every joint and every limb was filled with its barbs.'
CAochulainn carries the body of his slain foster-brother across the ford. After laying out Ferdiad's body, CAochulainn mourns:
Woe is me, the friend is fall'n
Whom I pledged in red blood's draught! (...)
All was play, all was sport,
Till came Ferdiad to the ford!
One task for both of us,
Equal our reward. (...)
All was play, all was sport,
Till came Ferdiad to the ford!
One our life, one our fear,
One our skill in arms. (...)
All was play, all was sport,
Till came Ferdiad to the ford!
Dear the shaft of gold
I smote on the ford.
Bull-chief of the tribes,
Braver he than all!
Only games and only sport,
Till came Ferdiad to the ford!
Lion furious, flaming, fierce;
Swollen wave that wrecks like doom!
Only games and only sport,
Till came Ferdiad to the ford!
Loved Ferdiad seemed to me
After me would live for (ever)!
Yesterday, a mountain's size -
He is but a shade today!
Three things countless on the TA¡in
Which have fallen by my hand:
Hosts of cattle, men and steeds
I have slaughtered on all sides! (...)
Never trod in battle's ring;
Banba nursed not on her breast;
Never sprang from sea or land,
King's son that had larger fame!

Judith.
The Duke of Ormonde, James Butler (1610 -1688), laid the foundation stone for the Royal Hospital Kilmainham in 1680. He wanted the Royal Hospital  to be on a grand scale, classical in layout and continental in style. He needed a home for his pensioner soldiers but equally he wanted a building of distinction that would, he hoped, mark the starting point of Dublin's development into a city of European standing. The current restoration of the gardens incorporates features of French formal gardens with plants, sculpture and furniture, similar to those in vogue at the time the Royal Hospital was built (1684). This includes a number of Classical-style statues throughout the gardens.
From Wikipedia:
"The account of the beheading of Holofernes by Judith is given in the deuterocanonical book of Judith, and is the subject of more than 114 paintings and sculptures. In the story, Judith, a beautiful widow, is able to enter the tent of Holofernes because of his desire for her. Holofernes was an Assyrian general who was about to destroy Judith's home, the city of Bethulia (...). Overcome with drink, he passes out and is decapitated by Judith; his head is taken away in a basket (often depicted as carried by an elderly female servant).
Artists have mainly chosen one of two possible scenes (with or without the servant): the decapitation, with Holofernes prone on the bed, or the heroine holding or carrying the head." 

Vonolel The War Horse.
n the south-west corner of the Formal Garden at the Royal Hospital Kilmainham, there is an unusual grave. Here is the memorial headstone to Vonolel, a twenty-nine year old war veteran, who had taken part in the Battle of Kandahar, during the second Anglo-Afghan War (1878-1880).
Vonolel was awarded three medals by Queen Victoria and he retired from service to the Curragh, Kildare.
Vonolel was of course a horse, a white Arab charger, bought in Bombay in 1877 at the age of four. Vonolel was 14.2 hands high and he was named after a Lushai chief.
His master was Field Marshal Frederick Sleigh Roberts who claimed that together they had travelled over 50,000 miles, including a march from Kabul to Kandahar. Roberts served as Commander-in-Chief in Ireland from 1895 to 1899. Lord Roberts was said to be heartbroken when his beloved horse died here at the Royal Hospital in June 1899.
Part of the headstone reads:
There are men both good and wise
Who hold that in a future state
Dumb creatures we have cherished here below
Shall give us joyous greeting when
We pass the golden gate
Is it folly that I hope it may be so?

A Tree for Joseph Beuys.
During the 1970s the internationally acclaimed artist Joseph Beuys visited Dublin and selected the Royal Hospital Kilmainham as a site for his proposed Free International University for Creativity.  Beuys's dream was not realized but in 1991, IMMA was finally opened on the site.  Beuys's project 7000 Oaksbegan in 1982 at Documenta 7, the large international art exhibition in Kassel, Germany. The ambitious five year project incorporated planting 7,000 trees throughout the city, each with an accompanying basalt stele marker. The solid stone form beside the ever-changing tree symbolically represents a basic concept in Beuys' philosophy, that these two natural and yet oppositional qualities are complementary and coexist harmoniously.  Following the 1991 exhibition Joseph Beuys, Bits and Pieces at IMMA, Caroline Tisdall decided to plant an oak tree in memory of the artist.

The Bell Tower of the RHK.
The bell tower of the Royal Hospital Kilmainham, once housed this large bell, but it was later removed due to its great weight. It can now be seen in the basement of the Royal Hospital, on the way to the IMMA shop and cafA©.
The bell was cast in Dublin in June 1783 at founders Pounded and Heavside, at 26 Old Church Street and 9 Luke Street.
The bell cost A£62 9s and 8d (roughly A£6,000 today). Known as "Burgoyne's Bell," it was dedicated to Lieutenant-General John Burgoyne (1722 - 1792), a Master of the Royal Hospital Kilmainham.

Gary Hume's 'Back of Snowman'.
Gary Hume is widely recognised as one of the most significant painters to have come to prominence in the past decade.  Born in 1962 in Kent, he graduated from Goldsmiths in 1988. He was one of a generation of artists who became known internationally as the 'yBas' (young British artists)
Hume has explored iconic images, and in Back of Snowman engages with perhaps one of the most familiar, accessible and recognisable shapes, stirring the imagination and conjuring memories associated with youth.  Hume's chosen medium for this traditionally temporary and ephemeral shape is bronze, with its contrasting connotations of permanence and stability.  An engagement with icons which have art-historical associations is also evident in Hume's practice. 
http://storyscope6.ssl.co.uk/dossiers/1533/objectstories/2367
French born Bernar Venet has had a prolific career as an artist, working in photography, sculpture, painting, choreography, set design, costume design, furniture design, poetry, and as a composer.  Working with huge sections of steel, Venet forges his material to form beautiful, and conceptually challenging artworks.  In his sculptural work, the artist started by using very simple mathematical information like angles, arcs, curves, realising that the main subject of his work was becoming the line. Venet states that colour is not something that interests him, preferring the inherent nature and resonance of his chosen material.

SENTINEL VIII.
This sculpture by Catherine Lee (b. 1950) is entitled SENTINEL VIII. In an interview in the Austin Chronicle (18 January 2008), Lee said:
"Most of my titles are a bit oblique. For example, the Hebrides sculptures: To me, it is relevant that these were spawned in the Outer Hebrides, (Scotland), where there are some amazing Stonehenge-like structures and massive menhirs (standing stones). They are not meant to mimic any of these things, they are not representational, but they address that sense of awe I felt when I was there. In another series called the Clad Sentinels I think they contain a sense of sentries standing guard."

North South East West.
American sculptor Lynda Benglis's North South East West, takes the form of a cast bronze fountain. In 2009 it was shown for the first time here in the actual fountain at the centre of the Formal Gardens at IMMA. The artist has been developing the idea of this hydraulic sculpture since her extraordinary cantilevered installations of the early 1970s, now mostly destroyed. Her first fountain The Wave (The Wave of the World), 1983, was created for the World Fair in New Orleans.
Taking the body and landscape as prime references, some of Benglis's works appear to defy gravity, being famously described as 'frozen gestures'. Her interest in the process of art making first manifested itself in her early wax reliefs, created by applying one layer of wax on top of another, building up a geological landscape in such works as Cacoon, 1971. Materials are also at the core of Benglis's 'Fallen Paintings', such as Blatt, 1969, in which liquids, including rubber latex or polyurethane foam, are poured directly onto the floor and against the wall.
This approach to both process and materials can be seen in the fountain piece at IMMA. The four parts of the sculpture, North South East West, appear as molten jets that have suddenly cooled into dripping rock formations. The temporary nature of bronze in its heated liquid seems to be captured here in its cooled permanent state.

Frederick Sleigh Roberts, 1st Earl Roberts.
Born at Cawnpore, India, on 30 September 1832. At the time his father was commanding the 1st Bengal European Regiment. Roberts was educated at Eton, Sandhurst and Addiscombe Military Seminary before entering the East India Company Army as a Second Lieutenant with the Bengal Artillery. 
Roberts fought in the Indian Rebellion of 1857 (also known as the Indian Mutiny). Having been promoted to second captain in 1860 and to brevet major on 13 November 1860, he transferred to the British Army in 1861 and served in the Umbeyla and Abyssinian campaigns of 1863 and 1867-1868. He was given command of the Kurram field force in March 1878 and took part in the Second Anglo-Afghan War, distinguishing himself enough to receive the thanks of Parliament.
In September 1879 he was despatched to Kabul to seek retribution for the death of Sir Louis Cavagnari, the British envoy there. After completing his mission to occupy Kabul, he was appointed commander of the Kabul and Kandahar field force and led his 10,000 troops across 300 miles of rough terrain in Afghanistan to relieve Kandahar and defeat Ayub Khan at the Battle of Kandahar on 1 September 1880.For his services, Roberts again received the thanks of Parliament. 
After a very brief interval as Governor of Natal and Governor and Commander-in-Chief of the Transvaal Province and High Commissioner for South Eastern Africa with effect from 7 March 1881, Roberts was appointed Commander-in-Chief of the Madras Army on 16 November 1881. 
After relinquishing his Indian command and becoming Knight Grand Commander of the Order of the Star of India (GCSI) on 3 June 1893. In 1895 he was sent to command forces In Ireland. 
In December 1899 Roberts returned to South Africa  to take overall command of British forces in the Second Boer War. His appointment was a response to a string of defeats in the early weeks of the war. After almost a year of fighting The Boer forces disintegrated, and with the war apparently effectively over, Roberts returned to England to receive yet more honours.
He took part in the funeral procession following the death of Queen Victoria in January 1901 and the funeral procession following the death of King Edward VII in May 1910. 

Francis Johnston and the Richmond Tower.
Francis Johnston was born in Armagh where he trained as an architect. His most notable work in Dublin is the General Post Office on O'Connell Street, a large Green Revival Structure. He also oversaw the conversion of the parliament house on College Green into the Bank of Ireland and was heavily involved in the design of Nelson's Pillar. Johnston not only designed Neo Classical works, his Dublin Castle Chapel is an early Gothic Revival masterpiece and the Richmond Tower is also Gothic Revial in Style. 
When Johnston designed the Richmond Tower he placed his personal coat of arms above the arch, concealed by a piece of wood painted to match the stone. His idea being that his arms would be revealed to future generations after the wood became rotten. However, his little trick was uncovered when the gateway was taken down for removal. The current coat of arms on the gateway is that of the Royal Hospital.

"Little Bobs" - The Irish Connection.
Roberts was the son of General Sir Abraham Roberts, a native of County Waterford. His mother was Isabella Bunbury, daughter of Major Abraham Bunbury from Kilfeacle in County Tipperary.
Roberts had a distinguished military career, becoming known as a leader of men rather than a commander of men. It was said that the rank and file of the British army would follow "Little Bobs" anywhere (he was 5' 4" tall)
On 23 February 1892 he was created Baron Roberts of Kandahar in Afghanistan and of the City of Waterford.  Lord Roberts was relocated to Ireland as Commander-in-Chief of British forces there from 1 October 1895. Vonolel, Earl Roberts faitful horse, accompanied Roberts to Ireland where the latter served as Commander-in-Chief from 1895 to 1899. When he died in 1899 he was buried with full military honours. 
Roberts was approached for advice about the Ulster Voluntary Force, formed in January 1913 by Ulstermen who had no wish to be part of a Home Rule Ireland. Blame for the resulting 'Curragh Incident' which saw officers from the Curragh barracks refusing to 'coerece' Ulser if Home Rule was implemented, has been laid upon Earl Roberts. 

The Statue of Prince Albert, Dublin.
Few people know of the presence of Prince Albert's statue, which can be found next to the Natural History Museum on Leinster Lawn. When it was first proposed to put up an Albert statue College Green was proposed but there was much Nationalist opposition to the plan. Albert once sat at the centre of the lawns to the east of Leinster House, but was moved to make way for a cenotaph in 1923. 
The statue is by John Henry Foley R.H.A., and represents Albert on a plinth with four young male figures below. These figures have attributes representing the Prince's intersts - art, scinece, agriculture and industry. 
In June 1872 an unsuccesful attempt was made to blow up the Albert statue. Despite this, Albert has remained while the much larger statue of his wife Victoria, which sat in the middle of the west Leinster Lawn, was removed in 1948. 

Queen Victoria at the Royal Hospital Kilmainham.
When Queen Victoria was winched from her plinth outside Leinster house in July 1948 she was lowered onto a flatbed lorry and brought to the Royal Hospital Kilminham, then Garda Headquarters. She had spent almost 40 years on Leinster Lawn.
This picture was taken in July 1977 and shows Victoria in the courtyard of the Royal Hospital Kilmainham along with the figures from the base of the sculpture Hibernia at War and Hibernia at Peace. The courtyard was used as a dumping ground for British Imperal sculpture removed after independence. 
When work began on the restoration of the Royal Hospital in 1980 Queen Victora was moved to a grim yard behind a disused children's reformatory at Daingean, County Offaly where she sat until a decision was made to donate the statue to the people of Sydney. The statue was 'transported' in September 1986. 

Callanish Stones, Outer Hebrides, Scotland
The Callanish Stones are located near the village of Callanish on the west coast of the Isle of Lewis in Western Isles of Scotland. Construction of the site took place between 2900 and 2600 BC. A tomb was later built into the site. Debris from the destruction of the tomb suggests the site was out of use between 2000 BC and 1700 BC. 
The 13 primary stones form a circle about 13 m in diameter, with a long approach avenue of stones to the north, and shorter stone rows to the east, south, and west. From above, the stones are laid out in roughly the shape of a high cross.  The individual stones vary from around 1 m to 5 m in height, with an average of 4 m. 

Queen Victoria at the Royal Hospital Kilmainham, 1849.
On Tuesday 7 August the Anglo-Celt Newspaper tells us that Queen Victora visited the Royal Hospital Kilmainham where her reception by the veterans of that establishment  was touching in the highest degree and her acknowledgement of their true heartedness most gracious. Following her visit the Queen presented a heraldic glass window which can now be found in the east wall of the hospital. The window is by stained glass artist Michael O'Connor and dates to 1852. 

Susana Solano.
Born in Barcelona in 1946, Susana Solano is one of a handful of Spanish artists in her generation who has gained international recognition. Her work was included in such major exhibitions as the Carnegie International in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, 1988; Documenta 8 Kassel, Germany, 1987; and she was one of two artists representing Spain in the XLIII Venice Biennale in 1988. She is a graduate of Bellas Artes de San Jorge, Barcelona. Her sculpture Carmen was commissioned by IMMA in 2011, and can now be seen in IMMA's Formal Gardens.

Escaped Animals.
The urban environment represents a particular focus for the artist Julian Opie. Borrowing idioms and images from everyday life, he re-interprets and plays with our notions of the ordinary. In Escaped Animals, Opie produced a series of thirteen road signs, each depicting an individual animal. Each animal, (including a fox, squirrel, sheep and cat) has been represented as an outline shape against a different coloured background.

The Dying Fusilier.
The statue of Queen Victoria that once stood on Leinster Lawn was an elaborate affair. The Queen sat at the top with little Putti at her feet, and below this were three  thematic sculptural groups.  There was 'Fame' (glory achieved through order), 'Peace' (agriculture crowning with a symbol of plenty a worker wearing a leather apron such as a blacksmith's), and 'Erin and the Dying Soldier' (loyalty demonstrated by the sacrifice of Irish soldiers in the Boer War 1899-1902). The soldier is a Royal Dublin Fusilier. 
'Fame' and 'Peace' can still be found at Leinster House, while the sculpture now widely know as 'The Dying Fusilier' can be found in the grounds of Dublin Castle.

Architectural plinth fragments designed by Thomas Manly Deane from the Queen Victoria statue.
The statue of Queen Victoria that stood on Lenister Lawn from 1908 to 1948. The elaborate architectural plinth was designed by the architect Thomas Manly Deane. 
The statue was dismantled in July 1948 and the various compnents were brought to the Royal Hospital Kilmainham. The bronze statues sat in the courtyard. These were later dispersed, with Queen Victoria being sent to Sydney and the allegoriacal figurs of Erin going to Dublin Castle. The putti can be found in the formal gardens at the Royal Hospital. 
These large architectural fragmetns are inside Bullys Acre graveyard. 

The Avenue from the Richmond Gate.
This view up the avenue to the Royal Hospital may have been taken c.1865. 
The sentry, standing in front of his hut, is most likely wearing the uniform of the Royal Dublin Fusiliers, which included a red blazer and a bearskin hat. 

About Catherine Lee.
Born in Texas in 1950, Catherine Lee came to prominence as a Minimalist in the 1970s. Lee began her career as a painter and her wall sculptures, mostly dating from the late 1980s, could be seen as a continuation of her early interest in two-dimensional works.   
In the late 1990s she began to produce free-standing sculpture, though the forms of the pieces were still predominantly flat and frontal. While Lee's work has continued to situate itself in relation to Minimalism, she has developed an increasing interest in evoking landscape and natural materials.
Her work juxtaposes the simplicity of a repeated form with a richness of materials, such as wax, bronze, glass and fibreglass. She first exhibited in New York at P.S.1 in 1980, and since then has participated in numerous exhibitions internationally. In 2005 IMMA exhibited a retrospective of works by the artist and Lee was artist in residence for three months before this. 

Queen Victoria at the Royal Hospital Kilmainham, 1900.
In March 1900 Queen Victoria announced that she would visit Ireland for Easter and stay three weeks. This came as a great shock to the Dublin authorities who had only three weeks to prepare for her visit! At 2:15pm on Tuesday 3rd April, the Royal yacht dropped anchor in Dun Laoghaire harbour and the following day the Queen made the nine mile journey to the Phoenix Park through thronged streets and cheering crowds. 
As part of that visit, on Tuesday April 10th, the Queen visited the Royal Hospital in Kilmainham where an aged veteran of the Afghan War of 1839 presented her with a nosegay.

The Life of the Duke of Wellington.
Wellington, "the Honourable Arthur Wesley," was born in Ireland on 1 May 1769, probably in 24 Upper Merrion Street, Dublin.
Young Arthur attended school in Trim, Co. Meath, near the family seat at Dangan. He then moved with his parents to London. In 1781 he went to Eton College, but apparently showed little promise or social skills. In January 1786 he was dispatched to the Academy of Equitation at Angers in preparation for the military career.
He was subject of a number of military commissions and promotions, and appointed as aide-de-camp to the Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, Lord Buckingham. In 1790 Arthur replaced his brother as MP for the family borough of Trim (where Arthur is commemorated by an obelisk).
In March 1807, he became chief secretary for Ireland. He reorganised the Dublin police and introduce an Irish Insurrection Bill. In June 1808, following a popular uprising in Spain against the French military occupation, Wellesley was ordered to take a force already assembled in Ireland to the Iberian Peninsula to support Portuguese and Spanish armies. Years of war followed and Wellesley became an able military commander, his most famous military service being the campaign against Napolean.
After Napoleon's defeat and abdication in 1813, Wellesley was regarded by the British as a conquering hero, and he was created Duke of Wellington. Napoleon escaped from Elba in 1815 and regained control of France. Wellington arrived in Belgium to take command of the Allied armies who were stationed there alongside the Prussian forces. Following the defeat of Napoleon at Waterloo, the Treaty of Paris was signed on 20 November 1815.
Wellington was now internationally renowned and celebrated. He returned to British politics, becoming prominent in the Tory party. In 1828 he became the Prime Minister of the United Kingdom. The highlight of his term was Catholic Emancipation; the granting of almost full civil rights to Catholics in the United Kingdom. His nickname "The Iron Duke" originates from this period, when he experienced a high degree of personal and political unpopularity. Wellington retired from political life in 1846, although he remained Commander-in-Chief, and returned briefly to the spotlight in 1848 when he helped organise a military force to protect London during that year of European revolution.
Wellington died on 14 September 1852.

Untitled.
Untitled is one of a series of large to medium-scale bronze sculptures by Tony Cragg, the forms of which are derived from scientific laboratory vessels.  The work has a singular element taking the form of a glass bottle or flask and reveals the artist's ongoing interest in science and technology and the world of manufacturing.  This is expressed by the use of a diversity of materials with a conventional commitment to sculptures as objects complete in themselves.  

The Life of Charles Lennox, 4th Duke of Richmond.
Charles Lennox, fourth duke of Richmond, was born in Scotland in September 1764, reportedly in a barn when his mother was on a fishing party.
In 1790, he became MP for Sussex, and he represented the county until he succeeded to the dukedom of Richmond and Lennox on the death of his uncle, in 1806.
On 1 April 1807 he was appointed Lord Lieutenant of Ireland. Colonel Arthur Wellesley (later the Duke of Wellington) was his Chief Secretary. He remained Lord Lieutenant until 1813 and was reportedly popular, despite spending much, and being against Roman Catholic emancipation.
After a period in Brussels, Richmond was appointed governor-in-chief of British North America in 1818. The next year, during an expedition, he died in agony in a barn a few miles from Richmond, Upper Canada, probably as a result of being bitten by a pet fox.

The Original Location of the Richmond Tower.
The Richmond Tower is the western gate to the Royal Hospital Kilmainham. It was originally situated at the junction of Watling Street and Victoria Quay.
In 1847 the Tower and gate were moved to its present location because traffic problems had increased due to the recent opening of the major new train station at Kingsbridge (now Heuston station).
The Tower was relocated to this site because its architect, Francis Johnston, was also responsible for alterations to the courtyard and north range of the Royal Hospital in the early 1800s. The Tower is named after the Duke of Richmond who was Lord Lieutenant of Ireland from 1807 to 1813.

About James McKenna.
Irish sculptor, poet, and playwright James McKenna (1933-2000) studied sculpture at the National College of Art, Dublin. He then spent eight months in Florence. The work of the Italian Renaissance masters influenced McKenna throughout his career.
Political events, often married with Celtic mythology, also informed his work. McKenna was a founding member of both the Independent Artists' Group and the Rising Ground theatre group. He exhibited widely nationally and internationally in the 1980s and 1990s.
A major retrospective of his work was held at IMMA in 2007.

About Julian Opie.
Julian Opie was born in 1958 in London. He is an English painter, sculptor, printmaker and installation artist. Opie studied under Michael Craig-Martin at Goldsmiths between 1979 and 1982. Opie worked as an assistant to Craig-Martin becoming gaining recognition on the British art scene with a series of painted metal sculptures.
His distinctive graphic work characteristically subverts a straightforward relationship with the familiar. Opie has exhibited widely in Europe and the US. His work is represented in many significant public collections including that of IMMA, Tate and The National Portrait Gallery in London, and MoMA in New York.

Recurring Line: North/South.
Part of Donald Urquhart's practice is drawing made directly in the landscape itself, in which he responds to specific contexts regarding the site.  At IMMA, the artist was commissioned to plant a line of snowdrops, 100 meters long and one meter wide. The line running on a north/south axis acts as a divider to the museum's formal and structured gardens based on a 17th century French design, and the meadows.  The snowdrop flower has a certain resonance; the resilient plant defies odds by surviving harsh winter conditions.  The metric measurements used in the works scale references the imperial tradition of the historic Royal Hospital site.  

About Donald Urquhart.
Donald Urquhart is one of the leading Scottish artists of his generation. He grew up in rural surroundings in central Scotland where he explored the countryside and forests. His grandfather was a forester and this has inspired his love of nature and his interest in the environment since he was a child.
He started out by studying drawing and painting at Edinburgh College of Art. While grounded in the disciplines of drawing and painting, Urquhart's practice has diversified in recent years, with work in both landscape and architectural contexts and encompassing the use of a wide range of media including audio, text, video and photography.

About Bernar Venet.
Bernar Venet was born in 1941. He is a French Conceptual artist. He was brought up in Chateau-Arnoux-Saint-Auban and had a religious upbringing, aspiring to become a missionary. However, he became interested in painting and drawing at a young age. He worked as a stage designer at the Nice Opera in 1959. Early in his career, he painted with tar, creating his art with his feet in a gestural style. This work eventually developed into black monochromatic paintings which eschewed all forms of action painting. In 1966, during a two-month visit to New York, Venet was influenced by Minimalism, consequently incorporating this style into his art. Also around this period, Venet became interested in logic and mathematics and produced works around these concepts. Venet's work has become known internationally, with sculptures exhibited in Belgium, America, Japan, Austria, Switzerland, Germany and more recently New Zealand. In 2012, luxury car maker Bugatti invited Venet to create a one-off artwork to be applied to a Veyron Grand Sport. The finished work, described as "the fastest artwork ever."

About Tony Cragg.
English sculptor Tony Cragg was born in 1949. He attended the Wimbledon School of Art and then the Royal College of Art. He relocated to Wuppertal, Germany in 1977 and began teaching at Duesseldorf's Kunstakademie in 1988. With fellow sculptors Bill Woodrow and Richard Decon, Cragg became associated with the 'New British Sculpture' movement of the 1980s. He won the Turner Prize in 1988. Casting in glass, bronze, aluminium and iron, Cragg's ongoing interest in science and technology is combined with a commitment to sculptures as objects complete in themselves.

Abstract Composition (Flames against Skyscrapers).
By 1920 Gleizes had developed a style based on his first abstract pictures of 1915, characterized by dynamic intersections of vertical, diagonal, horizontal and circular movements, austere in touch but loaded with energetic pattern (see Painting Object, 1921). He sought to clarify his methods further in La Peinture et ses lois (Paris, 1923), in which he deduced the rules of painting from the picture plane, its proportions, the movement of the human eye and the laws of the universe. This theory, later referred to as translation-rotation, ranks with the writings of Mondrian and Malevich as one of the most thorough expositions of the principles of abstract art, which in his case entailed the rejection not only of representation but also of geometric forms.

The coining of the term Cubism.
The term 'Cubism' is derived from a reference made to 'geometric schemas and cubes' by the critic Louis Vauxcelles in describing paintings, including this one, exhibited in Paris by Georges Braque in November 1908

Single Element: Green Abstract.
Within a rectangle, the eye is focussed on motifs, set on a palette-like shape, part outlined in yellow and placed against other hard-edged shapes, built up like a collage. The central elements hint at seated and reclining figures, without being as specific as in her religious-inspired abstracts of the period. The 1920s were the decade when Jellett pursued her most abstract agenda, as the minimal titles, often 'Composition' or a number of 'Elements', make clear. This is an excellent example of Jellett's engagement with modernism and the theories of Albert Gleizes (1881-1953) she had absorbed while making visits to his studio with Evie Hone (1894-1955). Having exhibited two abstract works in Dublin in 1923 (one of them Decoration, NGI 1326) that attracted great negative criticism, she was not deterred and developed her own distinctive abstract style. In the mid-1920s she exhibited with avant-garde painters in Paris, London and Versailles and was part of the Irish art section at the Olympic Games in Amsterdam in 1928. There is a sense of exploration that marks out her work, which adopts the approach and even some of the shapes familiar from Gleizes, achieved by the famous theories of 'translation' and 'rotation'. She develops them with even greater rigour. She would frequently explore a theme in a series of graphite drawings. Three of these (NGI 18244-18246) show part of the development for this painting. A watercolour study, as was often made to establish the colours, is known (Peppercanister Gallery, Dublin, 2009). She pared away in places and added detailing in others to refine this non-representational language. The texture of the paint surface and canvas contribute to the tactile quality of the work, as in other pictures of the period. It has a refined notation and unusual green colouring that is very striking, hence being familiarly known as Green Abstract.

Mainie Jellett's 'Decoration': An abstract painting.
Mainie Jellett's 'Decoration' is a completely abstract, non-figurative painting - Jellett is not concerned with presenting us with a narrative, but in experimenting with form and colour. She was aiming for an art that went beyond pure description towards something deeper and more spiritual.
In one of her essays she wrote:
"My aim was to search into the inner rhythms and constructions of natural forms, to create on their pattern; to make a work of art a natural creation complete in itself, based on the eternal laws of balanced harmony and ordered movement. I sought the inner principle and not the outward appearance."
This idea of seeking the inner principle and not the outward appearance is reminiscent of a quote about modern art by the 19th century French Symbolist poet, Paul Valery. Valery wrote that modern artists wanted "the grin without the cat" - in other words that they wanted to capture the sensation of life without the boredom of its conveyance- without illusionism or narrative, aiming instead for something deeper, more invisible, and in Mainie's case, more spiritual than mere imitation.

Mainie Jellett and Andre Lhote.
In 1921 Mainie Jellett travelled to Paris and studied under the Cubist artist Andre Lhote. Here she began her experimentations with Cubism, while still retaining, in her paintings, an identifiable subject such as figures, or still lifes. Her paintings from this time show her beginning to simplify and reduce forms to the bare essentials, however, she hasn't yet begun to flatten and fragment her forms - the women in these paintings are rounded and robustly feminine. After a year, in 1922, Mainie felt that she had learned all she could from Lhote and was eager to explore non-representational art with Albert Gleizes.

A Cubist still life.
Picasso was a leading figure of the avant-garde in Spain and Paris and became the most influential figure in modern art in the first half of the 20th century. He was still in Barcelona when he underwent his melancholic 'Blue Period' (1901-1904). He settled in Paris in 1904, taking a studio in the Montmartre tenement known as 'le Bateau-Lavoir'. In 1907 he painted the revolutionary Les Demoiselles d'Avignon, under the influence of African primitivism. With Georges Braque, Picasso created Analytical Cubism (1907-1914), which challenged the optical realism of Impressionism, aiming to express the permanent structure of an object by depicting it as a series of planes, showing it as it would be seen from a number of viewpoints.
In 1924 Picasso spent the summer in Juan-les-Pins where he continued to work on large-scale, Cubist still lifes of a type started the year before. The exuberant light and colours of the Mediterranean inspired him to create more vibrant compositions, such as the canvas shown here.
Still Life with a Mandolin is a night scene in which a fruit dish, bottle and mandolin are displayed on a table covered by a white-striped red cloth. All the objects are painted in a rhythmic and balanced order with lush plain colours and different pattern motifs, showing a decorative taste acquired by Picasso from Henri Matisse.

